The 13th Conference of 

The Association for Machine Translation 

in the Americas 

www.conference.amtaweb.org

WORKSHOP PROCEEDINGSMarch 21, 2018Translation Quality Estimation andAutomatic Post-EditingOrganizers: Ramón Astudillo (Unbabel, INESC-ID)João Graça (Unbabel)André Martins (Unbabel, University of Lisbon)Contents 

I 

II 

Introduction 

Program 

III 

Invited Speakers 

1 

Automatic Post-Editing and Machine Translation Quality Estimation at eBay 

Nicola Ueffing 

35 

Lightweight Word-Level Confidence Estimation for Neural Interactive Translation Prediction 

Rebecca Knowles and Philipp Koehn 

41 

Unbabel: How to combine AI with the crowd to scale professional-quality translation 

João Graça 

86  Machine translation at Booking.com: what's next? 

Maxim Khalilov 

144 

Are we experiencing the Golden Age of Automatic Post-Editing? 

Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt 

207 

Challenges in Adaptive Neural Machine Translation 

Marcello Federico 

243 

Fine-grained evaluation of Quality Estimation for Machine translation based on a linguistically-
motivated Test Suite 

Eleftherios Avramidis, Vivien Macketanz, Arle Lommel and Hans Uszkoreit 

249  A Comparison of Machine Translation Paradigms for Use in Black-Box Fuzzy-Match Repair 

Rebecca Knowles, John E. Ortega and Philipp Koehn 

INTRODUCTION 

The  goal  of  quality  estimation  is  to  evaluate  a  translation  system’s  quality  without 
access to reference translations (Blatz et al., 2004; Specia et al., 2013). This has many 
potential  usages:  informing  an  end  user  about  the  reliability  of  translated  content; 
deciding  if  a  translation  is  ready  for  publishing  or  if  it  requires  human  post-editing; 
highlighting  the  words  that  need  to  be  changed.  Quality  estimation  systems  are 
particularly  appealing  for  crowd-sourced  and  professional  translation  services,  due  to 
their potential to dramatically reduce post-editing times and to save labor costs (Specia, 
2011).  The  increasing  interest  in  this  problem  from  an  industrial  angle  comes  as  no 
surprise (Turchi et al., 2014; de Souza et al., 2015; Martins et al., 2016, 2017; Kozlova 
et  al.,  2016).  A  related  task  is  that  of  automatic  post-editing  (Simard  et  al.  (2007), 
Junczys-Dowmunt  and  Grundkiewicz  (2016)),  which  aims  to  automatically  correct  the 
output of machine translation. Recent work (Martins, 2017, Kim et al., 2017, Hokamp, 
2017) has shown that the tasks of quality estimation and automatic post-editing benefit 
from being trained or stacked together. 

In this workshop, we will bring together researchers and industry practitioners interested 
in  the  tasks  of  quality  estimation  (word,  sentence,  or  document  level)  and  automatic 
post-editing,  both  from  a  research  perspective  and  with  the  goal  of  applying  these 
systems in industrial settings for routing, for improving translation quality, or for making 
human post-editors more efficient. Special emphasis will be given to the case of neural 
machine translation and the new open problems that it poses for quality estimation and 
automatic post-editing. 

The workshop will consist of one full day of technical presentations, including a tentative 
number  of  6  invited  talks  and  1  contributed  talk,  followed  by  a  30-minutes  panel 
discussion. There will be a poster session featuring the papers accepted for publication 
in the workshop proceedings. 

The workshop organizers, 

André Martins (Unbabel and University of Lisbon) 
andre.martins@unbabel.com 

Ramon Astudillo (Unbabel and INESC-ID Lisboa) 
ramon@unbabel.com 

João Graça (Unbabel) 
joao@unbabel.com 

IPROGRAM 

9:00 — Welcome 

9:15 - 10:00 — Nicola Ueffing: “Automatic Post-Editing and  Machine Translation 
Quality Estimation at eBay” 

10:00 - 10:30 — Rebecca Knowles: “Lightweight Word-Level Confidence Estimation for 
Neural Interactive Translation Prediction” 

10:30 - 11:00 — Coffee Break 

11:00 - 11:45 — João Graça: “Unbabel: How to combine AI with the crowd to scale 
professional-quality translation” 

11:45 - 12:30 — Maxim Khalilov: “Machine translation at Booking.com: what's next?” 

12:30 - 14:00 — Lunch break 

14:00 - 14:45 — Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt: “Are we experiencing the Golden Age of 
Automatic Post-Editing?” 

14:45 - 15:30 — Marcello Federico: “Challenges in Adaptive Neural Machine 
Translation” 

15:30 - 16:00 — Coffee Break 

16:00 - 16:20 — Eleftherios Avramidis: “Fine-grained evaluation of Quality Estimation 
for Machine translation based on a linguistically-motivated Test Suite” 

16:20 - 16:40 — Rebecca Knowles: “A Comparison of Machine Translation Paradigms 
for Use in Black-Box Fuzzy-Match Repair” 

16:45 - 17:30 — Discussion Panel (Nicola Ueffing, Maxim Khalilov, Marcello Federico, 
Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Alon Lavie)   

IIINVITED SPEAKERS 

 
Nicola Ueffing (eBay) 
 
Title: Automatic Post-Editing and  Machine Translation Quality Estimation at eBay 
 
Abstract: This presentation will give an overview of Automatic Post-Editing and Quality 
Estimation research and development for e-commerce data at eBay. I will highlight two 
projects: (1) Application of Automatic Post-Editing and Machine Translation for Natural 
Language Generation for e-commerce browse pages, where the structured data 
describing the products is automatically “translated” into natural language; and (2) 
Quality Estimation for Machine Translation of eBay item titles, which compares general 
models and models which are specifically trained for three different categories in the 
inventory of eBay’s marketplace platform for prediction of post-edition effort. 
 
Bio: Nicola joined eBay's machine translation research team in May 2016. Her focus is 
on machine translation, both for e-commerce content and for natural language 
generation, and quality estimation. Prior to working for eBay, Nicola was a language 
modeling research scientist at Nuance Communications, leading the research and 
development for dictation products like Dragon NaturallySpeaking. Nicola received a 
PhD in computer science from RWTH Aachen University, specializing in confidence 
estimation for machine translation. She then joined the Interactive Language 
Technologies team at the National Research Council Canada as PostDoc research 
associate. Her research interests include machine translation as well as most other 
areas of computational natural language processing. 
 
 
Maxim Khalilov (Booking) 
 
Title: Machine translation at Booking.com: what's next? 
 
Abstract: For many years, machine translation (MT) was primarily focused on the post-
editing scenario, in which MT serves as a productivity increase element of a 
professional translation pipeline. However, in e-commerce the most desirable 
application of MT is direct publishing of MTed content that dictates different 
requirements to MT and the MT quality evaluation model.  
In this talk, Maxim Khalilov will discuss the Booking.com approach to MT and its 
evaluation. He will also cover some scenarios in which e-commerce can benefit from 
advancements in quality estimation and automatic post-editing. 
 

IIIBio: Maxim Khalilov is a product owner - data science at Booking.com responsible for 
business aspects of scaled content product development. Prior to his current role, 
Maxim was a CTO at bmmt GmbH, an innovative German language service provider, 
an R&D manager at TAUS and a post-doctoral researcher at the University of 
Amsterdam. Maxim has a Ph.D. from Polytechnic University of Catalonia (Barcelona, 
2009), an MBA from IE Business School (Madrid, 2016) and is the author of more than 
30 scientific publications. 
 
 
Marcello Federico (MMT Srl/FBK Trento, Italy) 
 
Title: Challenges in Adaptive Neural Machine Translation 
 
Abstract: Neural machine translation represents today the state of the art in terms of 
performance. However, its deployment in a real-life and dynamic scenario, where 
multiple users work on different tasks,  presents some important trade-offs and 
challenges.  In my talk, I will describe the development and deployment of adaptive 
neural machine translation within the ModernMT EU project, from phrase-based to 
neural machine translation.  Besides discussing the technological solutions adopted in 
ModernMT, I will  connect them to the underlying research efforts conducted at FBK in 
the recent years, including online-learning, automatic post-editing, and translation 
quality estimation.  
 
Bio: Founder and CEO of MMT Srl, Trento, Italy.  Research director (on leave) and 
Affiliated Fellow at Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy.  Lecturer at the ICT 
International Doctoral School of the  University of Trento.  Co-founder and scientific 
advisor of MateCat Srl. Research interests:  machine translation, natural language 
processing, machine learning and artificial intelligence.    
 
 
João Graça (Unbabel) 
 
Title: Unbabel: How to combine AI with the crowd to scale professional-quality 
translation 
 
Abstract: Unbabel is accelerating the shift towards a world without language barriers by 
enabling trustworthy, seamless and scalable translations between companies and their 
customers. In this talk we will show how we combine different Machine Learning 
techniques together with a crowd of non-professional translators and achieve 

professional-quality translations in an unprecedented speed and scale. We will also 
show how quality estimation is used in different steps of the pipeline. 
 
Bio: João Graça is currently the CTO of Unbabel. He was previously the data scientist 
and natural language processing expert at Dezine and Flashgroup. João did his PhD in 
Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning at Instituto Superior Técnico 
together with the University of Pennsylvania with Professors Fernando Pereira, Ben 
Taskar and Luísa Coheur. He is the author of several papers in the area, his main 
research topics are machine learning with side information, unsupervised learning and 
machine translation. João is one of the co-founders of the Lisbon Machine Learning 
Summer School (LxMLS).  
 
 
Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt (Microsoft Research) 
 
Title: Are we experiencing the Golden Age of Automatic Post-Editing? 
 
Abstract: In this talk I will describe the rise of neural methods in Automatic Post-Editing 
and why I believe that we might have reached a “Golden Age” of (neural) post-editing 
methods. This will be mostly based on the example of the recent WMT shared tasks on 
Automatic Post-Editing and my own contributions to that task. I will contrast current 
architectures with historic solution and will argue that only now --- with the on-set of 
neural sequence-to-sequence methods --- automatic post-editing has matured enough 
to have the potential for practical applications. However, there is a risk that this Golden 
Age might be very short lived and future results might be much less encouraging than 
the last two WMT shared task on APE might imply. 
 
Bio: Marcin has been working in the Machine Translation team at Microsoft AI and 
Research -- Redmond as a Principal NLP Scientist since January 2018. Before joining 
Microsoft he was an Assistant Professor at the Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznan, 
Poland, and a visiting researcher in the MT group at the University of Edinburgh. He 
also collaborated for many years with the World Intellectual Property Organization and 
the United Nations, helping with the development of their in-house statistical and neural 
machine translation systems. His main research interests are neural machine 
translation, automatic post-editing and grammatical error correction. Most of his open-
source activity is being eaten up by his NMT pet-project Marian 
(http://github.com/marian-nmt/marian). 
 
 

