Can LSTM Learn to Capture Agreement? The Case of Basque

Shauli Ravfogel1 and Francis M. Tyers2,3 and Yoav Goldberg1,4

1 Computer Science Department, Bar Ilan University
2 School of Linguistics, Higher School of Economics

3 Department of Linguistics, Indiana University

{shauli.ravfogel, yoav.goldberg}@gmail.com, ftyers@prompsit.com

4 Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence

Abstract

Sequential neural networks models are pow-
erful tools in a variety of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tasks. The sequential nature
of these models raises the questions: to what
extent can these models implicitly learn hier-
archical structures typical to human language,
and what kind of grammatical phenomena can
they acquire?
We focus on the task of agreement predic-
tion in Basque, as a case study for a task
that requires implicit understanding of sen-
tence structure and the acquisition of a com-
plex but consistent morphological system. An-
alyzing experimental results from two syntac-
tic prediction tasks – verb number prediction
and sufﬁx recovery – we ﬁnd that sequential
models perform worse on agreement predic-
tion in Basque than one might expect on the
basis of a previous agreement prediction work
in English. Tentative ﬁndings based on diag-
nostic classiﬁers suggest the network makes
use of local heuristics as a proxy for the hier-
archical structure of the sentence. We propose
the Basque agreement prediction task as chal-
lenging benchmark for models that attempt to
learn regularities in human language.
Introduction

1
In recent years, recurrent neural network (RNN)
models have emerged as a powerful architec-
ture for a variety of NLP tasks (Goldberg,
2017). In particular, gated versions, such as Long
Short-Term Networks (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997) and Gated Recurrent Units
(GRU) (Cho et al., 2014; Chung et al., 2014)
achieve state-of-the-art results in tasks such as lan-
guage modeling, parsing, and machine translation.
RNNs were shown to be able to capture long-
term dependencies and statistical regularities in in-
put sequences (Karpathy et al., 2015; Linzen et al.,
2016; Shi et al., 2016; Jurafsky et al., 2018; Gu-
lordava et al., 2018). An adequate evaluation of

the ability of RNNs to capture syntactic struc-
ture requires a use of established benchmarks. A
common approach is the use of an annotated cor-
pus to learn an explicit syntax-oriented task, such
as parsing or shallow parsing (Dyer et al., 2015;
Kiperwasser and Goldberg, 2016; Dozat and Man-
ning, 2016) . While such an approach does evalu-
ate the ability of the model to learn syntax, it has
several drawbacks. First, the annotation process
relies on human experts and is thus demanding
in term of resources. Second, by its very nature,
training a model on such a corpus evaluates it on
a human-dictated notion of grammatical structure,
and is tightly coupled to a linguistic theory. Lastly,
the supervised training process on such a corpus
provides the network with explicit grammatical la-
bels (e.g. a parse tree). While this is sometimes
desirable, in some instances we would like to eval-
uate the ability of the model to implicitly acquire
hierarchical representations.

Alternatively, one can train language model
(LM) (Graves, 2013; J´ozefowicz et al., 2016;
Melis et al., 2017; Yogatama et al., 2018) to model
the probability distribution of a language, and use
common measures for quality such as perplexity
as an indication of the model’s ability to capture
regularities in language. While this approach does
not suffer from the above discussed drawbacks,
it conﬂates syntactical capacity with other factors
such as world knowledge and frequency of lexi-
cal items. Furthermore, the LM task does not pro-
vide one clear answer: one cannot be “right” or
“wrong” in language modeling, only softly worse
or better than other systems.

A different approach is testing the model on a
grammatical task that does not require an exten-
sive grammatical annotation, but is yet indicative
of syntax comprehension. Speciﬁcally, previous
works (Linzen et al., 2016; Bernardy and Lap-
pin, 2017; Gulordava et al., 2018) used the task
of predicting agreement, which requires detecting

Proceedingsofthe2018EMNLPWorkshopBlackboxNLP:AnalyzingandInterpretingNeuralNetworksforNLP,pages98–107Brussels,Belgium,November1,2018.c(cid:13)2018AssociationforComputationalLinguistics98hierarchal relations between sentence constituents.
Labeled data for such a task requires only the col-
lection of sentences that exhibit agreement from
an unannotated corpora. However, those works
have focused on relatively small set of languages:
several Indo-European languages and a Semitic
language (Hebrew). As we show, drawing con-
clusions on the model’s abilities from a relatively
small subset of languages can be misleading.

In this work, we test agreement prediction in
a substantially different language, Basque, which
is a language with ergative–absolutive alignment,
rich morphology, relatively free word order, and
polypersonal agreement (see Section 3). We pro-
pose two tasks, verb-number prediction (Section
6) and sufﬁx prediction (Section 7), and show that
agreement prediction in Basque is indeed harder
for RNNs. We thus propose Basque agreement as
a challenging benchmark for the ability of models
to capture regularities in human language.

2 Background and Previous Work
To shed light on the question of hierarchical struc-
ture learning, a previous work on English (Linzen
et al., 2016) has focused on subject-verb agree-
ment: The form of third-person present-tense
verbs in English is dependent upon the number
of their subject (“They walk” vs. “She walks”).
Agreement prediction is an interesting case study
for implicit learning of the tree structure of the in-
put, as once the arguments of each present-tense
verb in the sentence are found and their grammat-
ical relation to the verb is established, predicting
the verb form is straightforward.

Linzen et al. (2016) tested different variants of
the agreement prediction task: categorical pre-
diction of the verb form based on the left con-
text; grammatical assessment of the validity of the
agreement present in a given sentence; and lan-
guage modeling. Since in many cases the verb
form can be predicted according to number of the
preceding noun, they focused on agreement attrac-
tors: sentences in which the preceding nouns have
the opposite number of the grammatical subject.
Their model achieved very good overall perfor-
mance in the ﬁrst two tasks of number prediction
and grammatical judgment, while in the third task
of language modeling, weak supervision did not
sufﬁce to learn structural dependencies. With re-
gard to the presence of agreement attractors, they
have shown the performance decays with their
number, to the point of worse-than-random accu-
racy in the presence of 4 attractors; this suggests

the network relies, at least to a certain degree, on
local cues. Bernardy and Lappin (2017) evaluated
agreement prediction on a larger dataset, and ar-
gued that a large vocabulary aids the learning of
structural patterns. Gulordava et al. (2018) fo-
cused on the ability of LM’s to capture agreement
as a marker of syntactic ability, and used nonsen-
sical sentences to control for semantic clues. They
have shown positive results in four languages, as
well as some similarities between their models’
performance and human judgment of grammati-
cality.
3 Properties of the Basque Language
Basque agreement patterns are ostensibly more
complex and very different from those of English.
In particular, nouns inﬂect for case, and the verb
agrees with all of its core arguments. How well
can a RNN learn such agreement patterns?

We ﬁrst outline key properties of Basque rele-
vant to this work. We have used the following two
grammars written in English for reference (Laka,
1996; de Rijk, 2007).
Morphological marking of case and number on
NPs The grammatical role of noun phrases is ex-
plicitly marked by nuclear case sufﬁxes that attach
after the determiner in a noun phrase — this is typ-
ically the last element in the phrase.

The nuclear cases are the ergative (ERG), the
absolutive (ABS) and the dative (DAT).1
In ad-
dition to case, the same sufﬁxes also encode for
number (singular or plural) as seen in Table 1.
Ergative-absolutive case system Unlike En-
glish and most other Indo-European languages
that have nominative–accusative morphosyntactic
alignment in which the single argument of intran-
sitive verbs and the agent of transitive verbs be-
have similarly to each other (“subjects”) but dif-
ferently from the object of transitive verbs, Basque
has ergative–absolutive alignment. This means
that the “subject” of an intransitive verb and the
“object” of a transitive verbs behave similarly to
each other and receive the absolutive case, while
the “subject” of a transitive verb receives the erga-
tive case. To illustrate the difference, while in
English we say “she sleeps” and “she sees them”
(treating she the same in both sentences), in an
1Additional cases encode different aspects of the role of
the noun phrase in the sentence. For example, local cases
indicate aspects such as destination and place of occurrence,
possessive/genitive cases indicate possession, causal cases in-
dicate causation, etc. In this work we focus only on the three
mentioned.

99Case

Function

Absolutive
Ergative
Dative

S, O
A
IO

Sufﬁx Forms

Sg
-a
-ak
-ari

Pl
-ak
-ek
-ei

No det
-
-(e)k
-(r)i

Table 1: Basque case and their corresponding determined
nuclear case sufﬁxes. Note the case syncretism, resulting in
structural ambiguity between the plural absolutive and the
ergative singular. Under function, S refers to the single ar-
gument of a prototypical intransitive verb, O refers to the
most patient-like argument of a prototypical transitive verb,
and A refers to the most agent-like argument of a prototyp-
ical transitive verb. Subsequently IO refers to the indirect
object, often ﬁlling the recipient or experiencer role.

imaginary ergative-absolutive version of English
we would say “she sleeps” and “her sees they”,
inﬂecting “she” and “they” similarly (the absolu-
tive), and different from “her” (the ergative).
Examples The following sentence (1) demon-
strates the use of case sufﬁxes to encode grammat-
ical function.

(1) Kutxazain-ek

bezeroa-ri
customer-SG.DAT

cashier-PL.ERG
liburu-ak
book-PL.ABS
The cashiers gave the books to the cus-
tomer.

eman dizkiote
gave they-them-to-her/him

In (1),

the verb eman ‘give’ is transitive,
the ergative corresponds to English grammati-
cal subject and the absolutive corresponds to En-
glish grammatical object. However, Basque is
absolutive–ergative, namely, the subject of an in-
transitive verb is marked for case like the object of
a transitive verb, and differently from the subject
of a transitive verb (2).

(2) Kutxazain-ak

cashier-PL-ABS
The cashiers are here.

hemen
here

daude
they are-PL.ABS3

Since the verb daude ‘are’ is intransitive, the
word kutxazain- ‘cashier’ accepts the plural abso-
lutive sufﬁx -ak, and not the plural ergative sufﬁx
-ek.

Interestingly, Basque exhibits case syncretism,
namely, nuclear case sufﬁxes are ambiguous: the
sufﬁx -ak marks both plural absolutive and singu-
lar ergative. Compare Example (3) with Exam-
ple (4).

(3) Pertson-ak

person-SG.ERG
ikusten ditu
he/she-sees-them

zuhaitz-ak
tree-PL.ABS

The person sees the trees.

(4) Zuhaitz-ak

pertson-ak
person-PL.ABS

tree-SG.ERG
ikusten ditu
seeing it-is-them
The tree sees the people.

Word-order
and Polypersonal Agreement
Basque is often said to have a SOV word order,
although the rules governing word order are
rather complex, and word order is dependent
on the focus and topic of the sentence. While
the case marking system handles most of the
word-order variation, the ambiguity between the
single ergative and plural absolutive — which are
both marked with -ak — results in sentence-level
ambiguity. For instance, Example (3) can also
be interpreted as “it is the tree [SG] that sees
the people [PL]” (with a focus on “the tree”).
Disambiguation in such cases depends on context
and world knowledge.

Unlike English verbs that only agree in num-
ber with their grammatical subject, Basque verbs
agree in number with all their nuclear arguments:
the ergative, the absolutive and the dative (roughly
corresponding to the subject, the object and the
indirect object).2 Verbs are formed in two ways:
aditz trinkoak ‘synthetic verbs’ — such as jakin
‘to know’ — are conjugated according to the as-
pect, tense and agreement patterns, e.g. dakigu
‘We know it’ and genekien ‘We knew it’. There are
only about two dozen such verbs; all other verbs
are composed of a non-ﬁnite stem, indicating the
tense or aspect, and an auxiliary verb, that is con-
jugated according to the number of its arguments
— such as ikusi ‘to see’ — e.g. ikusten dugu ‘We
see it’ and ikusi genuen ‘We saw it’. There are
several auxiliary verbs, including izan ‘to be’ and
ukan ‘to have’. The form of an auxiliary verb used
in a sentence also is also dependent on the transi-
tivity of the verb, with izan being the intransitive
auxiliary and ukan being the transitive auxiliary.
To summarize Noun phrases are marked for
case (ergative, absolutive or dative) and number
(singular or plural), and appear in relatively-free
word order relative to the verb to which they are
arguments. The verbs (or their auxiliaries) inﬂect
for tense, time and number-agreement, and agree
with all their arguments on number. Case syn-

2Note that some arguments, in particular proper-nouns,
are not marked for number. Other arguments, in particular the
ergative, can be omitted and not spelled out. The verb form
still needs to mark the correct number for these arguments.

100cretism results in ambiguity between the singular
ergative and the plural absolutive sufﬁxes.
4 Learning Basque Agreement
To assess the ability of RNNs to learn Basque
agreement we perform two sets of experiments. In
the ﬁrst set (Section 6), we focus on the ability to
learn to predict the number inﬂections of verbs,
namely, the number of each of their arguments,
where the model reads the sentence, with one of
the verbs randomly replaced with a (cid:104)verb(cid:105) token.
This is analogous to the agreement task explored
in previous work on English (Linzen et al., 2016)
and other languages (Gulordava et al., 2018), but
in an arguably more challenging settings, as the
Basque task requires the model:
(a) to identify
all the verb’s arguments; (b) to learn the ergative–
absolutive distinction; and (c) to cope with a rel-
atively free word order and a rich morphological
inﬂection system. As we show, the task is indeed
substantially harder than in English, resulting in
much lower accuracies than in Linzen et al. (2016)
while not focusing on the hard cases.

However, we also identify some problems with
the verb number prediction task. The presence of
case sufﬁxes presumably makes the task easier, in
some sense, than in English: the grammatical role
of arguments with respect to the verb is encoded in
grammatical sufﬁxes, potentially making it easier
to capture surface heuristics that do not require the
understanding of the hierarchical structure of the
sentence. In addition, the ergative—whose num-
ber is encoded in the verb form—is often omitted
from sentences, making the task of ergative num-
ber prediction impossible without relying on con-
text or world knowledge. We thus propose an al-
ternative setup (Section 7), in which, rather than
predicting the agreement pattern of the verb, we
remove all nuclear case sufﬁxes from words and
ask the model to recover them (or predict the ab-
sence of a sufﬁx, for unsufﬁxed words). We argue
that this setup is a better one for assessing mod-
els’ ability to capture Basque sentence structure
and agreement system: it requires the model to ac-
curately identify the role of NPs with respect to a
verb in order to assign them the correct case sufﬁx
(as marked on the verb), while not requiring the
model to make-up information that is not encoded
in the sentence.
5 Experimental Setup
In contrast to more explicit grammatical tasks (e.g.
tagging, parsing), the data needed for training a

model on agreement prediction task does not re-
quire annotated data and can be derived relatively
easily from unannotated sentences. We have used
the text of the Basque Wikipedia. A considerable
number of the articles in Basque Wikipedia ap-
pear to be bot-generated; we have tried to ﬁlter
these from the data according to keywords. The
data consists of 1,896,371 sentences; we have used
935,730 sentences for training, 129,375 for valida-
tion and 259,215 for evaluation. We make the data
publicly available3.

We use the Apertium morphological analyzer
(Forcada et al., 2011; Ginest-Rosell et al., 2009) to
extract the parts-of-speech (POS) and morpholog-
ical marking of all words.4 The POS information
was used to detect verbs, nouns and adjectives, but
was not incorporated in the word embeddings.

For section 7.1, grammatical generalization, we
used the Basque Universal Dependencies treebank
(Aranzabe et al., 2015) to extract human-annotated
POS, case, number and dependency edge labels.
We have used their train:dev:test division, result-
ing in 5,173 training sentences, 1,719 develop-
ment sentences and 1,719 test sentences.

(cid:80)

Word Representation We represent each word
with an embedding vector. To account for the
rich morphology of Basque, our word embeddings
combine the word identity, its lemma5 as deter-
mined by the morphological analyzer, and charac-
ter ngrams of lengths 1 to 5. Let Et, El and Eng
be token, lemma and n-gram embedding matrices,
and let tw, lw and {ngw} be the word token, the
lemma and the set of all n-grams of lengths 1 to
5, for a given word w. The ﬁnal vector represen-
tation of w, ew, is given by ew = Et[t] + El[l] +
ng∈{ngw} Eng[ng]. We use embedding vectors
of size 150. We recorded the 100,000 most com-
mon words, n-grams and lemmas, and used them
to calculate the vector representation of words.
Out-of-vocabulary words, ngrams and lemmas are
replaced by a (cid:104)unk(cid:105) token.
Model
In previous studies, the agreement was
between two elements, and the model was tasked
with predicting a morphological property of the
second one, based on a property encoded on the

3http://nlp.biu.ac.il/data/basque/
4We use the Apertium analyzer instead of other options as
it is freely available online under a free/open-source licence
covering both the lexicon and the source code.

5Most words admit to a single interpretation by the mor-
phological analyzer. For words that had several optional lem-
mas, we chose the ﬁrst one, after the exclusion of colloquial
or familiar verb forms, which are infrequent in Wikipedia.

101Sufﬁx

Closest verb is incorrect

Closest verb is correct

-ak
-ek

Rec
70.2 (2961)
60.8 (758)

Prec
85.2 (2438)
98.2 (469)

F1
76.9
75.1

Rec
80.5 (8312)
64.7 (1976)

Prec
88.2 (4954)
95.9 (1333)

F1
84.1
77.2

Table 2: Model performance according to closest-verb grammatical connection to the verb, for sentences that contain the verb
da ‘it is’. The number of sentences appears in parentheses.

Verb form

Diagnostic classiﬁer

da ‘is’

zen ‘was’

Linear model
1-layer MLP
Linear model
1-layer MLP
ziren ‘were’ Linear model
1-layer MLP

Accuracy (%)

Total BiLSTM wrong BiLSTM correct
67.7
74.7
64.4
74.8
67.4
76.6

70.2
75.6
66.5
75.4
70.1
77.8

56.2
69.3
52.8
71.5
57.8
72.3

Majority (%)

62.4

61.9

59.8

Table 3: Diagnostic classiﬁer accuracy in predicting whether or not the closest verb is grammatically connected to a word,
according to BiLSTM sufﬁx prediction success on that word. “BiLSTM correct”: success rate on instances in which the BiL-
STM correctly predicted the case sufﬁx. ‘BiLSTM wrong”: success rate on instances in which the BiLSTM failed. “Majority”
signiﬁes the success of majority-classiﬁer.

ﬁrst. Thus, a uni-directional RNN sufﬁced. Here,
due to a single verb having to agree with sev-
eral arguments, while following a relatively free
word order, we cannot use a uni-directional model.
We opted instead for a bi-directional RNN.6 In
all tasks, we use a one-layer BiLSTM network
with 150 hidden units, compared with 50 units in
(Linzen et al., 2016) 7. In the verb prediction task,
the BiLSTM encodes the verb in the context of the
entire sentence, and the numbers of the ergative,
absolutive and datives are predicted by 3 indepen-
dent multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) with a single
hidden layer of size 128, that receive as an input
the hidden state of the BiLSTM over the (cid:104)verb(cid:105)
token.

In the sufﬁx prediction task, the prediction of
the case sufﬁx is performed by a MLP of size 128,
that receives as an input the hidden state of the
BiLSTM over each word in the sentence.

The whole model,

including the embedding,
is trained end-to-end with the Adam optimizer
(Kingma and Ba, 2014).

6 Verb Argument Number Prediction
In this task, the model sees the sentence with one
of the auxiliary verbs replaced by a (cid:104)verb(cid:105) token,
and predicts the number of its ergative, absolutive
and dative. For example, in (1) above, the network
sees the embeddings of the words in the sentence:8

6A unidirectional LSTM baseline achieved accuracy
scores of 86.6%, 91.7% and 98.2% and recall values of
78.9%, 100% and 60.1% for ergative, absolutive and dative
verb arguments prediction, respectively.

7Network size was chosen based on development set per-

formance.
8See:

Kutxazain-ek bezeroa-ri liburu-ak eman (cid:104)verb(cid:105)
It is then expected to predict the number of
the arguments of the missing verb, dizkiote: erga-
tive:plural, dative:singular and absolutive:plural.
Each argument can take one of three values, sin-
gular, plural or none. In order to succeed in this
task, the model has to identify the arguments of
the omitted verb, and detect their plurality status
as well as their grammatical relation to the verb.
Note that as discussed above, these relations do
not overlap with the notions of “subject” and “ob-
ject” in English, as the grammatical case is also
dependent on the transitivity of the verb. Since
the model is exposed to the lemma of the auxil-
iary verb and the stem that precedes it, it can, in
principle, learn dividing verbs into transitive and
intransitive.

6.1 Results and Analysis
We conducted a series of experiments, as detailed
below. A summary of all the results in available in
Table 4.

Main results The model achieved moderate suc-
cess in this task, with accuracy of 87.1% and
93.8% and recall of 80.0% and 100%9 in erga-
tive and absolutive prediction, respectively. Da-
tive accuracy was 98.0%, but the recall is low

(1) Kutxazain-ek

bezeroa-ri
customer-PL.DAT

liburu-ak
book-SG.ABS

cashier-PL.ERG
(cid:104)verb(cid:105)
eman
(cid:104)aux(cid:105)
give-PTCP
‘The cashiers gave the books to the customers’

9This reﬂects the fact the absolutive is almost always

present.

102Condition

Base
Sufﬁxes only
No sufﬁxes
Neutralized case
Single verb
No -ak
Sing. verb, no -ak

Ergative Absolutive
A / R
93.8 / 100
83.7 / 100
87.8 / 100
93.3 / 100
96.04 / 100
96.6 / 100
97.2 / 100

A / R
87.1 / 80.0
69.0 / 40.3
83.8 / 80.0
86.0 / 79.3
90.6 / 89.0
90.9 / 81.1
92.6 / 83.4

Dative
A / R
98.0 / 54.9
97.0 / 26.0
97.3 / 34.7
97.3 / 38.1
98.9 / 74.7
98.6 / 67.7
99.1 / 75.4

Table 4: Summary of verb number prediction results for ac-
curacy (A) and recall (R).

(54.9%), perhaps due to the relative rarity of dative
nouns in the corpus (only around 3.5% of the sen-
tences contain dative). These relatively low num-
bers are in sharp contrast to previous results on En-
glish in which the accuracy scores on general sen-
tences was above 99%. While English agreement
results drop when considering hard cases where
agreement distractors or intervening constructions
intervene between the verb and its argument, in
Basque the numbers are low already for the com-
mon cases.

This suggests that agreement prediction in
Basque can serve as a valuable benchmark for
evaluating the syntactic abilities of sequential
models such as LSTMs in a relatively challenging
grammatical environment, as well as for assessing
the generality of results across language families.

Ablations: case sufﬁxes vs. word forms The
presence of nuclear case sufﬁxes in Basque can, in
principle, make the task of agreement prediction
easier, as (ambiguous) grammatical annotation is
explicit in the form of the nuclear case sufﬁxes,
that encode the type of grammatical connection
to the verb. How much of the relevant informa-
tion is encoded in the case sufﬁxes? To investigate
the relative importance of these sufﬁxes, we con-
sidered a baseline in which the model is exposed
only to the nuclear sufﬁxes, ignoring the identi-
ties of the words and the character n-grams (Table
4, Sufﬁxes only). This model achieved accuracy
scores of 69.0%, 83.7% and 97.0% and recall val-
ues of 40.3%, 100% and 26% for ergative, absolu-
tive and dative prediction, respectively. While sub-
stantially lower than when considering the word
forms, the absolute numbers are not random, sug-
gesting that agreement can in large part be pre-
dicted based on the presence of the different suf-
ﬁxes and their linear order in the sentence, without
paying attention to speciﬁc words.

In a complementary setting the model is ex-

posed to the sentence after the removal of all
nuclear case sufﬁxes (according to the morpho-
logical analyzer output). This setting (Table 4,
No sufﬁxes) yields accuracies of 83.8%, 87.8%
and 97.3% and recall scores of 80.0%, 100% and
34.7% for ergative, absolutive and dative, respec-
tively. Interestingly, in the last setting the model
succeeds to some extent to predict the verb argu-
ments number although the number is not marked
on the arguments. This suggests the model uses
cues such as the existence of certain function
words that imply a number, and the forms of non-
nuclear sufﬁxes to infer the number of the argu-
ments.

Importance of explicit case marking The verb
numbers prediction task requires the model to
identify the arguments, and hence the hierarchical
structure of the sentence. However, the Basque
sufﬁxes encode not only the number but also the
explicit grammatical function of the argument.
This makes the model’s task potentially easier,
as it may make use of the explicit case informa-
tion as an effective heuristic instead of modeling
the sentence’s syntactic structure. To control for
this, we consider a neutralized version (Table 4,
Neutralized case) in which we removed case in-
formation and kept only the number information:
sufﬁxes were replaced by their number, or were
marked as “ambiguous” in case of -ak. For ex-
ample, the word kutxazainek was replaced with
kutxazain(cid:104)plural(cid:105), since the sufﬁx -ek encodes plu-
ral ergative. Interestingly, in this settings the per-
formance was only slightly decreased, with accu-
racy scores of 86.0%, 93.3% and 97.3% and recall
values of 79.3%, 100% and 38.1% for ergative,
absolutive and dative, respectively. These results
suggest that the network either makes little use of
explicit grammatical marking in the sufﬁxes, or
compensates for the absence of grammatical anno-
tation using other information present in the sen-
tence.

Performance on simple sentences The pres-
ence of multiple verbs, along with the inherent am-
biguity of the sufﬁx system, can both complicate
the task of number prediction. To assess the rel-
ative importance of these factors, we considered
modiﬁed training and test sets that contain only
sentences with a single verb (Table 4, Single verb).
This resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement, with
accuracy scores of 90.61%, 96.04% and 98.9%
and recall values of 89.0%, 100% and 74.7% for
ergative, absolutive, and dative, respectively; note

103that sentences with a single verb also tend to be
shorter and simpler in their grammatical structure.
To evaluate the inﬂuence of the ambiguous sufﬁx,
we removed all sentences that contain the ambigu-
ous sufﬁx -ak from the dataset (Table 4, No -ak).
This resulted in a more moderate improvement to
accuracy values of 90.9%, 96.6% and 98.6% and
recall of 81.1%, 100% and 67.7% for ergative, ab-
solutive and dative. Limiting the dataset to un-
ambiguous sentences with a single verb (Table 4,
Sing. verb, no -ak) yields an additional improve-
ment, with accuracies of 92.6%, 97.2% and 99.1%
and recall values of 83.4%, 100% and 75.4% for
ergative, absolutive and dative, respectively.
7 NP Sufﬁx Prediction
The general trend in the experiments above is a
signiﬁcantly higher success in absolutive number
prediction, compared with ergative number pre-
diction. This highlights a shortcoming in the verb-
number prediction task: as Basque encodes the
number of the verb arguments in the verb forms,
the subject can — and often is — be omitted from
the sentence. Additionally, the number of proper
nouns is often not marked. These cases are com-
mon for the ergative: 55% of the sentences marked
for ERG.PL3 agreement do not contain words suf-
ﬁxed with -ek.
This requires the model to pre-
dict the number of the verb based on information
which is not directly encoded in the sentence.

To counter these limitations, we propose an al-
ternative prediction task that also takes advantage
of the presence of case sufﬁxes, while not requir-
ing the model to guess based on unavailable infor-
mation. In this task, the network reads the input
sentence with all nuclear case sufﬁxes removed,
and has to predict the sufﬁx (or the absence of
thereof) for each word in the sentence. For ex-
ample, in (1) above, the model reads (5).

(5) Kutxazaina

dizkiote.

bezeroa

liburua

eman

-ak,

It is then expected to predict the omitted case
and determiner sufﬁxes (-ek,
-ari, none,
none). We note that we remove the sufﬁxes
only from NPs, keeping the verbs in their origi-
nal forms. As the verbs encode the numbers of
its argument as well as their roles, the network is
exposed to all relevant information required for
predicting the missing sufﬁxes, assuming it can
recover the sentence structure.
In order to suc-
ceed in this task, the model should link each ar-
gument to its verb, evaluate its grammatical re-

Sufﬁx
-ek [ergative plural]
-a [absolutive singular]
-ak [abs. pl / erg. sg]
-ari [dative singular]
-ei [dative plural]
Any

Prec Rec
74.7
82.0
83.2
88.0
83.1
83.2
80.2
77.5
64.5
65.5
95.1
91.7

F1
78.2
85.5
83.2
78.8
65.0
93.4

Table 5: nuclear case prediction results.

lation to the verb, and choose the case sufﬁx ac-
cordingly. Case sufﬁxes are appended at the end
of the NP. As a result, sufﬁx recovery also re-
quires some degree of POS tagging and NP chunk-
ing, and thus shares some similarities with shallow
parsing in languages such as English. This sug-
gests that the task of case sufﬁx recovery in lan-
guages with complex case system such as Basque
can serve as a proxy task for full parsing, while
requiring a minimal amount of annotated data.

The singular absolutive determiner sufﬁx, -a,
also appears in the base form of some words.
Therefore, for -a sufﬁxed words, we have used the
morphological analyzer to detect whether not the
-a sufﬁx is a part of the lemma. Consider the ex-
amples ur ‘water’—ura ‘the water-ABS’ and uda
‘summer’—uda ‘the summer-ABS’.
-a sufﬁxed
words not known to the analyzer were excluded
from the experiment.

7.1 Results and Analysis
The results for the sufﬁx prediction task are pre-
sented in Table 5 and Table 6. The model achieves
F1 scores of 78.2 and 83.2% for the erg. plural -ek
and absolutive singular/ergative singular -ak suf-
ﬁxes, respectively. The F1 score for the ABS sin-
gular sufﬁx -a is higher — 85.5%; This might be
due to the fact this sufﬁx is unambiguous (unlike
-ak), and the fact the absolutive is rarely omitted
(unlike words sufﬁxed with -ek), which implies
that verb forms indicating verb-absolutive singular
agreement also reliably predicts the presence of a
word sufﬁxed with -a in the sentence. Similarly
to the trend in the ﬁrst task, the model achieved
relatively low F1 scores in the prediction of dative
sufﬁxes, -ari and -ei: 78.8% and 65.0%, respec-
tively.
Importance of verb form Once the grammati-
cal connection between verbs and their arguments
is established, the nuclear sufﬁx of each of the
verb’s arguments is deterministically determined
by the form of the verb. As such, verb forms

104Base
Word-only
No verb

-ak
83.2
56.0
72.0

-ek
78.2
49.5
65.4

-a
85.5
55.2
78.1

-ari
78.8
56.5
67.5

-ei
65.0
24.2
47.3

Table 6: Summary of F1 scores for sufﬁx prediction.

are expected to be of importance for sufﬁx pre-
diction. To assess this importance, we have eval-
uated the model in a setting in which the original
verb forms are replaced by a (cid:104)verb(cid:105) token. In this
setting, the model achieved F1 scores of 72.0%,
65.4%, 78.1%, 67.5%, 47.3% and 92.0% for -ak,
-ek, -a, -ari, -ei, and the prediction of the pres-
ence of any nuclear sufﬁx, respectively (Table 6,
No verb). These results, that are far from random,
indicate that factors such as the order of words in
the sentence, the identity of the words (as certain
words tend to accept certain cases irrespective of
context), and the non-nuclear case sufﬁxes (which
are not omitted), all aid the task of nuclear-sufﬁx
prediction.
Word-only baseline Some words tend to appear
more frequently in certain grammatical positions,
regardless of their context. We therefore compared
the model performance with a baseline of a 1-layer
MLP that predicts the case sufﬁx of each word
based only its embedding vector. As expected,
this baseline achieved lower F1 scores of 56.0%,
49.5%, 55.2%, 56.5%, 24.2% and 69.8% for -ak,
-ek, -a, -ari, -ei, and the prediction of the presence
of any sufﬁx, respectively (Table 6, Words only).
Focusing on the harder cases An essential step
in the process of sufﬁx prediction is identifying
the arguments of each verb. To what extent does
the model rely on local cues as a proxy for this
task? A simple heuristics is relating each word
to its closest verb. We compared the model’s per-
formance on “easier” instances where the closest
verb is grammatically connected to the word, ver-
sus “harder” instances in which the closest verb is
not grammatically connected to the word.

This evaluation requires automatically judging
the grammatical connection between words and
verbs in the input sentence. Due to the ambiguous
case sufﬁxes, this is generally not possible in un-
parsed corpora. However, we focus on several spe-
cial cases of sentences containing exactly 2 verbs
of speciﬁc types, in which it is possible to unam-
biguously link certain words in the sentences to
certain verbs. Since these instances consists only a
fraction of the dataset, for this evaluation we have

used a larger test set containing 50% of the data.

Table 2 depicts the results for sentences that
contain the verb da ‘is’. The general trend, for
da and for several other verbs (not presented here
) , is higher F1 scores in the “easier” instances. We
note, however, that in these instances there is also
larger absolute distance between the verb and its
argument, which prevents us from drawing causal
conclusions.

Diagnostic classiﬁers To overcome this difﬁ-
culty and understand if the model encodes the
grammatical connection between a word to its
closest verb in the BiLSTM hidden state over a
given word, we have trained a diagnostic classiﬁer
(Adi et al., 2016; Hupkes and Zuidema, 2018) that
receives as an input the hidden state of a BiLSTM
over a word, and predicts whether or not the clos-
est verb (which is unseen by the diagnostic classi-
ﬁer) was grammatically connected to the word.

We have compared two diagnostic classiﬁers: a
linear model, and a 1-layer MLP. A training set
was created by collecting hidden states of the BiL-
STM over words, and labeling each training exam-
ple according to the existence of a verb-argument
connection between the word over which the state
was collected and its closest verb (a binary classi-
ﬁcation task). We then compared the success rate
of the diagnostic classiﬁer on instances in which
the BiLSTM correctly predicted a case sufﬁx (Ta-
ble 3, BiLSTM correct), versus the instances on
which the BiLSTM predicted incorrectly (Table 3,
BiLSTM wrong). The results, depicted in Table 3,
demonstrate that in instances in which the model
predicts a wrong case sufﬁx, the diagnostic clas-
siﬁer tends to inaccurately predict the connection
between the closest verb and the word. For exam-
ple, for sentences that contain the verb form da,
the success rate of the linear model increases from
56.2% to 70.2% in the instances in which the BiL-
STM predicted correctly. This differential success
may imply a causal relation between the inference
of the closest-verb grammatical connection to the
word and the success in sufﬁx prediction.

Grammatical generalization Does training on
sufﬁx recovery induce learning of grammatical
generalizations such as morphosyntactic align-
ment (ergative, absolutive or dative), number
agreement (sg / pl) and POS? To test this question,
We have collected the states of our trained model
over the words in sentences from the Basque Uni-
versal Dependencies dataset. Different diagnostic
classiﬁers were then trained to predict case, num-

105ber, POS and the type of the dependency edge to
the head of the word. All diagnostic classiﬁers are
MLPs with two hidden layers of sizes 100 and 50.
For each task, we trained 5 models with different
initializations and report those that achieved high-
est development set accuracy.

For nuclear case and number prediction, we
limit the dataset to words sufﬁxed with a nuclear
case. In this setting, for words on which the BiL-
STM predicted correctly, the MLPs perform well,
predicting the correct number with an accuracy of
95.0% (majority classiﬁer: 67.3%) and the correct
case with an accuracy of 93.5% (majority: 61.7%).
Even when the dataset is limited to words suf-
ﬁxed with the ambiguous sufﬁx -ak, the MLP cor-
rectly distinguishes ergative and absolutive with
91.2% accuracy (majority: 65.4%). Interestingly,
in a complementary setting on which the dataset
is limited to words on which the BiLSTM failed
in nuclear case sufﬁx recovery, a diagnostic classi-
ﬁer can still be trained to achieve 74.7% accuracy
in number prediction and 69.7% accuracy in case
prediction. This indicates that to a large degree,
the required information for correct prediction is
encoded by the state of the model even when it
predicts a wrong sufﬁx.

For the prediction of POS, dependency edge to
the head and any case (not just nuclear cases — 16
cases in total, including the option of an absence of
case), the dataset was not limited to words sufﬁxed
with nuclear cases or to words on which the BiL-
STM predicted correctly. The classiﬁer achieves
accuracies of 87.5% In POS prediction (majority:
23.2%), 85.7% in the prediction of any case (ma-
jority: 64.7%), and 69.0% for the prediction of de-
pendency edge to the head (majority: 19.0%).

These results indicate that during training on
sufﬁx recovery, the model indeed learns, to some
degree, the generalizations of number, alignment
and POS, as well as some structural information
(connection to the head in the dependency tree).
These ﬁndings support our hypothesis that a suc-
cess in case recovery entails the acquiring of some
grammatical information.

8 Conclusion
In this work, we have performed of series of con-
trolled experiments to evaluate the performance of
LSTMs in agreement prediction, a task that re-
quires implicit understanding of syntactic struc-
ture. We have focused on Basque, a language that
is characterized by a very different grammar com-
pared with the languages studied for this task so

far. We have proposed two tasks for the evaluation
of agreement prediction: verb number prediction
and sufﬁx recovery.

Both tasks were found to be more challenging
than agreement prediction in other languages stud-
ied so far. We have evaluated different contribut-
ing factors to that difﬁculty, such as the presence
of ambiguous case sufﬁxes. We have used diag-
nostic classiﬁers to test hypotheses on the inner
representation the model had acquired, and found
tentative evidence for the use of shallow heuristics
as a proxy of hierarchical structure, as well as for
the acquisition of grammatical information during
case recovery training.

These results suggest that agreement prediction
in Basque could be a challenging benchmark for
the evaluation of the syntactic capabilities of neu-
ral sequence models. The task of case-recovery
can be utilized in other languages with a case sys-
tem, and provide a readily-available benchmark
for the evaluation of implicit learning of syntac-
tic structure, that does not require the creation of
expert-annotated corpora. A future line of work
we suggest is investigating what syntactic repre-
sentations are shared between case recovery and
full parsing, i.e., to what extent does a model
trained on case recovery learn the parse tree of the
sentence, and whether transfer learning from case-
recovery would improve parsing performance.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mikel L. Forcada and
Mikel Artetxe for discussions regarding Basque
grammar and the anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments.

References
Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer
Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Fine-grained anal-
ysis of sentence embeddings using auxiliary predic-
tion tasks. CoRR, abs/1608.04207.

M. Aranzabe, A. Atutxa, K. Bengoetxea, A. Daz de
Ilarraza, I. Goenaga, K. Gojenola, and L. Uria. 2015.
Automatic conversion of the basque dependency
treebank to universal dependencies. In Proceedings
of the 14th International Workshop on Treebanks
and Linguistic Theories, TLT 2015.

Jean-Philippe Bernardy and Shalom Lappin. 2017. Us-
ing deep neural networks to learn syntactic agree-
ment. LiLT (Linguistic Issues in Language Technol-
ogy), 15.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar
Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares,

106Holger Schwenk,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
Learning Phrase Representations using RNN En-
coder–Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation.
In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1724–1734, Doha, Qatar. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.

Dieuwke Hupkes and Willem H. Zuidema. 2018. Visu-
alisation and ’diagnostic classiﬁers’ reveal how re-
current and recursive neural networks process hier-
In Proceed-
archical structure (extended abstract).
ings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, July
13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden., pages 5617–5621.

Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Empirical Evaluation
of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence
Modeling. arXiv:1412.3555 [cs].

Rudolf P. G. de Rijk. 2007. Standard Basque: A Pro-

gressive Grammar. MIT Press.

Timothy Dozat and Christopher D. Manning. 2016.
Deep biafﬁne attention for neural dependency pars-
ing. CoRR, abs/1611.01734.

Chris Dyer, Miguel Ballesteros, Wang Ling, Austin
Matthews, and Noah A. Smith. 2015. Transition-
based dependency parsing with stack long short-
In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
term memory.
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 7th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing of the Asian Fed-
eration of Natural Language Processing, ACL 2015,
July 26-31, 2015, Beijing, China, Volume 1: Long
Papers, pages 334–343.

M. L. Forcada, M. Ginest-Rosell,

J. Nordfalk,
J. O’Regan, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. P´erez-Ortiz,
F. S´anchez-Mart´ınez, G. Ramrez-S´anchez, and F. M.
Tyers. 2011. Apertium: a free/open-source platform
for rule-based machine translation. Machine Trans-
lation, 25(2):127–144.

Mireia Ginest-Rosell, Gema Ramrez-S´anchez, Sergio
Ortiz-Rojas, Francis M Tyers, and Mikel L For-
cada. 2009. Development of a free Basque to Span-
ish machine translation system. Procesamiento del
Lenguaje Natural, 43:187–195.

Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Neural Network Methods for
Natural Language Processing. Synthesis Lectures
on Human Language Technologies. Morgan & Clay-
pool Publishers.

Alex Graves. 2013. Generating sequences with recur-

rent neural networks. CoRR, abs/1308.0850.

Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave,
Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018. Colorless
green recurrent networks dream hierarchically.
In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA, June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages
1195–1205.

Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Neural computation,

Long short-term memory.
9(8):1735–1780.

Rafal J´ozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam
Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu. 2016. Exploring the lim-
its of language modeling. CoRR, abs/1602.02410.

Dan Jurafsky, He He, Peng Qi, and Urvashi Khandel-
wal. 2018. Sharp nearby, fuzzy far away: How neu-
ral language models use context. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, ACL 2018, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia, July 15-20, 2018, Volume 1: Long Papers,
pages 284–294.

Andrej Karpathy, Justin Johnson, and Fei-Fei Li. 2015.
Visualizing and understanding recurrent networks.
CoRR, abs/1506.02078.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam:
CoRR,

A method for stochastic optimization.
abs/1412.6980.

Eliyahu Kiperwasser and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Sim-
ple and accurate dependency parsing using bidirec-
tional LSTM feature representations. TACL, 4:313–
327.

Itziar Laka. 1996. A brief grammar of Euskara –
the Basque language. EHU Euskararako Errektore-
ordetza.

Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg.
2016. Assessing the ability of LSTMs to learn
syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–
535.

G´abor Melis, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. 2017. On
the state of the art of evaluation in neural language
models. CoRR, abs/1707.05589.

Xing Shi, Inkit Padhi, and Kevin Knight. 2016. Does
string-based neural MT learn source syntax? In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2016,
Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-4, 2016, pages
1526–1534.

Dani Yogatama, Yishu Miao, Gabor Melis, Wang Ling,
Adhiguna Kuncoro, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom.
2018. Memory architectures in recurrent neural net-
work language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations.

107