Comparing morphological complexity of Spanish, Otomi and Nahuatl

Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques

Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma

de M´exico
Mexico City

Victor Mijangos

Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma

de M´exico
Mexico City

xim@unam.mx

vmijangosc@ciencias.unam.mx

Abstract

We use two small parallel corpora for comparing the morphological complexity of Spanish,
Otomi and Nahuatl. These are languages that belong to different linguistic families, the latter
are low-resourced. We take into account two quantitative criteria, on one hand the distribution of
types over tokens in a corpus, on the other, perplexity and entropy as indicators of word structure
predictability. We show that a language can be complex in terms of how many different mor-
phological word forms can produce, however, it may be less complex in terms of predictability
of its internal structure of words.

1

Introduction

Morphology deals with the internal structure of words (Aronoff and Fudeman, 2011; Haspelmath and
Sims, 2013). Languages of the world have different word production processes. Morphological richness
vary from language to language, depending on their linguistic typology. In natural language processing
(NLP), taking into account the morphological complexity inherent to each language could be impor-
tant for improving or adapting the existing methods, since the amount of semantic and grammatical
information encoded at the word level, may vary signiﬁcantly from language to language.

Conceptualizing and quantifying linguistic complexity is not an easy task, many quantitative and
qualitative dimensions must be taken into account (Miestamo, 2008). On one hand we can try to answer
what is complexity in a language and which mechanisms express it, on the other hand, we can try to ﬁnd
out if there is a language with more complex phenomena (phonological, morphological, syntactical) than
other and how can we measure it. Miestamo (2008) distinguishes between two types of complexity: the
absolute, which deﬁnes complexity in terms of the number of parts of a system; and the relative, which is
related to the cost and difﬁculty faced by language users. Some authors focuses in the absolute approach
since it is less subjective. Another common complexity distinction is between global and particular.
Global complexity characterizes entire languages, e.g., as easy or difﬁcult to learn (Miestamo, 2008, p.
29), while particular complexity refers only to a level of the whole language (for example phonological
complexity, morphological complexity, syntactical complexity).

We focus on morphological complexity. Many deﬁnitions of this term have been proposed (Baerman
et al., 2015; Anderson, 2015; Sampson et al., 2009). From the computational linguistics perspective
there has been a special interest in corpus based approaches to quantify it, i.e., methods that estimate the
morphological complexity of a language directly from the production of morphological instances over
a corpus. This type of approach usually represents a relatively easy and reproducible way to quantify
complexity without the strict need of linguistic annotated data. The underlying intuition of corpus based
methods is that morphological complexity depends on the morphological system of a language, like its
inﬂectional and derivational processes. A very productive system will produce a lot of different word
forms. This morphological richness can be captured with several statistical measures, e.g., information
theory measures (Blevins, 2013) or type token relationships. For example, Bybee (2010, p. 9) afﬁrms
that “the token frequency of certain items in constructions [i.e., words] as well as the range of types [...]
determines representation of the construction as well as its productivity”.

ProceedingsoftheWorkshoponLinguisticComplexityandNaturalLanguageProcessing,pages30–37SantaFe,NewMexico,USA,August25,2018.30In this work, we are interested in using corpus based approaches; however, we would like to quan-
tify the complexity not only by the type and token distributions over a corpus, but also by taking into
account other important dimension: the predictability of a morph sequence (Montermini and Bonami,
2013). This is a preliminary work that takes as a case of study the distant languages Otomi, Nahuatl and
Spanish. The general idea is to use parallel corpora, type-token relationship and some NLP strategies
for measuring the predictability in statistical language models.

Additionally, most of the previous works do not analyze how the complexity changes when differ-
ent types of morphological normalization procedures are applied to a language, e.g., lemmatization,
stemming, morphological segmentation. This information could be useful for linguistic analysis and
for measuring the impact of different word form normalization tools depending of the language. In
this work, we analyze how the type-token relationship changes using different types of morphological
normalization techniques.

1.1 The type-token relationship (TTR)
The type-token relationship (TTR) is the relationship that exists between the number of distinct words
(types) and the total word count (tokens) within a text. This measure has been used for several purposes,
e.g., as an indicator of vocabulary richness and style of an author (Herdan, 1966; Stamatatos, 2009),
information ﬂow of a text (Altmann and Altmann, 2008) and it has also been used in child language
acquisition, psychiatry and literary studies (Malvern and Richards, 2002; Kao and Jurafsky, 2012).

TTR has proven to be a simple, yet effective, way to quantify the morphological complexity of a
language. This is why it has been used to estimate morphological complexity using relatively small
corpora (Kettunen, 2014). It has also shown a high correlation with other types of complexity measures
like entropy and paradigm-based approaches that are based on typological information databases (Bentz
et al., 2016)

It is important to notice that the value of TTR is affected by the type and length of the texts. However,
one natural way to make TTRs comparable between languages is to use a parallel corpus, since the same
meaning and functions are, more or less, expressed in the two languages. When TTR is measured over a
parallel corpus, it provides a useful way to compare typological and morphological characteristics of lan-
guages. Kelih (2010) works with parallel texts of the Slavic language family to analyze morphological
and typological features of the languages, i.e., he uses TTR for comparing the morphological produc-
tivity and the degree of syntheticity and analycity between the languages. Along the same line, Mayer
et al. (2014) automatically extract typological features of the languages, e.g., morphological synthesis
degree, by using TTR.

There exist several models that have been developed to examine the relationship between the types
tokens and it is the one that

and tokens within a text (Mitchell, 2015). The most common one is the ratio types
we use in this work.

1.2 Entropy and Perplexity
In NLP, statistical language models are a useful tool for calculating the probability of any sequence of
words in a language. These models need a corpus as training data, they are usually based on n-grams,
and more recently, in neural representations of words.

Information theory based measures can be used to estimate the predictiveness of these models, i.e.,
perplexity and entropy. Perplexity is a common measure for the complexity of n-grams models in
NLP (Brown et al., 1992). Perplexity is based in Shannon’s entropy (Shannon et al., 1951) as the
perplexity of a model µ is deﬁned by the equation 2H(µ), where H(µ) es the entropy of the model (or
random variable). Shannon’s entropy had been used for measuring complexity of different systems. In
linguistics, entropy is commonly used to measure the complexity of morphological systems (Blevins,
2013; Ackerman and Malouf, 2013; Baerman, 2012). Higher values of perplexity and entropy mean less
predictability.

Perplexity depends on how the model is represented (this includes the size of the data). In this work,
we compare two different models for calculating the entropy and perplexity: a typical bigram model

31adapted to a morph level(Brown et al., 1992); and our proposal based on using the word as a context
instead of ngrams.

We rely in parallel corpora to compare the measures across languages, since the same meaning and

functions are shared in the two languages.
Bigram model. This model takes into consideration bigrams (Brown et al., 1992) as context for deter-
mining the joint probabilities of the sub-strings. Here the bigrams are sequences of two morphs in
the text (whether they belong to the same word or not). This is a typical statistical language model
but instead of using sequences of words, we use morphological segmented texts. In addition, we use
a Laplacian (or add one) smoothing for the conditional probabilities (Chen and Goodman, 1999).

Word level. The word level representation takes the whole word as context for the determination of
joint probabilities. Therefore, the frequency of co-occurrence is different from zero only if the
sub-word units (morphs) are part of the same word. For example, if xby is a word with a preﬁx x
and a sufﬁx y, the co-occurrence of x with b will be different from zero as both morphs are part
of the word xby. Similarly, the co-occurrence of y with b will be different from zero. Conversely,
if two morphs are sub-strings of different words, its co-occurrence will be zero. To calculate the
conditional probabilities we use and add one estimator deﬁned as:

Where V is the number of types and f r(·) is the frequency of co-occurrence function.

p(x|y) =

f r(x, y) + 1
f r(x, y) + V

(1)

2 Experimental setting
2.1 The corpus
We work with two language pairs that are spoken in the same country (Mexico) but they are typo-
logically distant languages: Spanish (Indo-European)-Nahuatl (Uto-Aztecan) and Spanish-Otomi (Oto-
Manguean). Both, Nahuatl and Otomi are low-resource languages that face scarcity of digital parallel
and monolingual corpora.

Nahuatl is an indigenous language with agglutinative and polysynthethic morphological phenomena.
It can agglutinate many different preﬁxes and sufﬁxes to build complex words. Spanish also has rich
morphology, but it mainly uses sufﬁxes and it can have a fusional behavior, where morphemes can be
fused or overlaid into a single one that encodes several grammatical meanings. Regarding to Otomi,
its morphology also has a fusional tendency, and it is head-marking. Otomi morphology is usually
considered quite complex (Palancar, 2012) as it exhibits different phenomena like stem alternation,
inﬂectional class changes and suprasegmental variation, just to mention some.

Since we are dealing with low resource languages that have a lot of dialectal and orthographic varia-
tion, it is difﬁcult to obtain a standard big parallel corpus. We work with two different parallel corpora,
i.e., Spanish-Nahuatl and Spanish-Otomi. Therefore the complexity comparisons are always in reference
to Spanish.

We used a Spanish-Nahuatl parallel corpus created by Gutierrez-Vasques et al. (2016). However, we
used only a subset since the whole corpus is not homogeneous, i.e., it comprises several Nahuatl dialects,
sources, periods of time and it lacks of a general orthographic normalization. We chose the texts that
had a more or less systematic writing. On the other hand, we used a Spanish-Otomi parallel corpus
(Lastra, 1992) conformed by 38 texts transcribed from speech. This corpus was obtained in San Andr´es
Cuexcontitlan. It is principally composed by narrative texts, but also counts with dialogues and elicited
data. Table 1 shows the size of the parallel corpora used for the experiments.

2.2 Morphological analysis tools
We used different morphological analysis tools, in order to explore the morphological complexity varia-
tion among languages and between the different types of morphological representations. We performed
lemmatization for Spanish language, and morphological segmentation for all languages.

32Parallel Corpus
Spanish-Nahuatl
Spanish (ES)
Nahuatl (NA)
Spanish-Otomi
Spanish (ES)
Otomi (OT)

Tokens Types

118364
81850

13233
21207

8267
6791

2516
3381

Table 1: Size of the parallel corpus

In NLP, morphology is usually tackled by building morphological analysis (taggers) tools. And more
commonly, lemmatization and stemming methods are used to reduce the morphological variation by
converting words forms to a standard form, i.e., a lemma or a stem. However, most of these technologies
are focused in a reduced set of languages. For languages like English, with plenty of resources and
relatively poor morphology, morphological processing may be considered solved.

However, this is not the case for all the languages. Specially for languages with rich morphological

phenomena where it is not enough to remove inﬂectional endings in order to obtain a stem.

Lemmatization and stemming aim to remove inﬂectional endings. Spanish has available tools to
perform this task. We used the tool Freeling1. Regarding to morphological segmentation, we used semi-
supervised statistical segmentation models obtained with the tool Morfessor (Virpioja et al., 2013). In
particular, we used the same segmentation models reported in Gutierrez-Vasques (2017) for Spanish
and Nahuatl. As for Otomi, we used manual morphological segmentation of the corpus, provided by a
specialist.

2.3 Complexity measures
We calculated the type-token relationship for every language in each parallel corpus. Table 2 shows
the TTR of the texts without any processing (ES, N A) and with the different types of morphological
processing: morphological segmentation (ESmorph, N Amorph), lemmatization (ESlemma). In a similar
way, Table 3 shows the TTR values for the Spanish-Otomi corpus. It is worth mentioning that the TTR
values are only comparable within the same parallel corpus.

ES
N A

ESmorph
N Amorph
ESlemma

Tokens
118364
81850
189888
175744
118364

Types
13233
21207
4369
2191
7599

TTR (%)

11.17
25.90
2.30
1.24
6.42

Table 2: TTR for Nahuatl-Spanish corpus

ES
OT

ESmorph
OTmorph
ESlemma

Tokens Types
2516
8267
3381
6791
14422
1072
1788
13895
8502
1020

TTR (%)

30.43
49.78
7.43
1.28
8.33

Table 3: TTR for Otomi-Spanish corpus

We also calculate the perplexity and complexity for the different languages. Since we are focusing
on morphological complexity, we took only the segmented data for computing the entropy and the
perplexity. We do not use the lemmatized or non segmented data since this would be equivalent to
measuring the combinatorial complexity between words, i.e. syntax. In this sense, the entropy and

1http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/

33perplexity reﬂects the predictability of the morphs sequences. Tables 4 and 5 shows the perplexity and
entropy in each language pair.

Word level Bigram model

N Amorph
ESmorph

ESmorph
OTmorph

ES-NA
214.166
1222.956
ES-OT
208.582
473.830

1069.973
2089.774

855.1766
1315.006

Table 4: Perplexity obtained in the different parallel corpora

Word level Bigram model

N Amorph
ESmorph

ESmorph
OTmorph

ES-NA
0.697
0.848
ES-OT
0.765
0.843

0.906
0.911

0.967
0.984

Table 5: Entropy obtained in the different parallel corpora

3 Results analysis
3.1 TTR as a measure of morphological complexity
When no morphological processing is applied, Nahuatl has a lot higher TTR value than Spanish, i.e., a
greater proportion of different word forms (types). In spite of Nahuatl having fewer tokens because of
its agglutinative nature, it has a lot more types than Spanish. This suggests that Nahuatl has a highly
productive system that can generate a great number of different morphological forms. In other words, it
is more likely to ﬁnd a repeated word in Spanish than in a Nahuatl corpus. In the case of Otomi-Spanish,
Otomi also has a bigger complexity compared to Spanish in terms of TTR. Even though both Otomi and
Spanish show fusional patterns in its inﬂection, Otomi also count with a lot of derivational processes
and shows regular stem alternations.

In every case, morphological segmentation induced the smallest values of TTR for all languages.
Suggesting that greater reduction of the morphological complexity is achieved when the words are split
into morphs, making it more likely to ﬁnd a repeated item. For instance, when Nahuatl was morpholog-
ically segmented, TTR had a dramatic decrease (from 26.22 to 1.23). This TTR reduction could be the
result of eliminating the combinatorial variety of the agglutinative and polysynthetical morphology of
the language. Therefore, when we segment the text we break this agglutination, leading to signiﬁcantly
less diverse units.

In the case of Otomi language, a similar trend can be observed. Otomi seems to be morphologically
more complex than Spanish in terms of TTR, i.e., more diverse types or word forms. When morphologi-
cal segmentation is applied, TTR decreases and Otomi language has a lower TTR compared to Spanish.
Even though Otomi is not a polysynthetic language like Nahuatl, these results suggest that Otomi has
also a great combinatory potential of its morphs, i.e, when Otomi gets morphologically segmented we
obtain less diverse types, these morphs may be recurrent in the text but they can be combined in many
several ways within the Otomi word structure. Linguistic studies have shown that Otomi language can
concatenate several afﬁxes, specially in derivative processes (Lastra, 1992).

It has brought to our attention that Spanish has a higher TTR than Nahuatl and Otomi, only when the
languages are morphologically segmented. It seems that the morphs inventory is bigger in Spanish, we
conjecture this is related to the fact that Spanish has more suppletion or “irregular” forms phenomena
(Boy´e and Hofherr, 2006).

343.2 Predictability

The predictability of the internal structure of word is other dimension of complexity.
It reﬂects the
difﬁculty of producing novel words given a set of lexical items (stems, sufﬁxes or morphs). First of all,
as a general overview, we can see that word level models have the lower perplexity and entropy (Tables
4 and 5). We believe that this type of models capture better the morphological structure, since they take
into account the possible combinations of morphs within a word and not outside the bounds of it (like
the bigram model).

It is interesting to compare the TTR and the predictability measures for each language. In the case of
Nahuatl, TTR shows that there is a lot of complexity at lexical level (many different word forms, few
repetitions), however, this contrasts with the predictability of the elements that conform a lexical item:
the combination of morphs within a word is more predictable than Spanish, since it obtains lower values
of Perplexity and entropy. The combinatorial structure of Nahuatl morphology shows less uncertainty
than Spanish one, despite the fact that Nahuatl is capable of producing many more different types in the
corpus due to its agglutinative and polysynthetic nature.

The case of Otomi language is different, since it seems that it is not only complex in terms of TTR
but also in terms of predictability. It obtains higher entropy and perplexity than Spanish. We conjecture
this is related to several phenomena. For instance, Otomi and Nahuatl allow a large number of morphs
combinations to modify a stem (inﬂectional and derivational). However, Otomi shows phenomena that
is not easy to predict; for example, it has a complex system of inﬂectional classes, stem alternations and
preﬁx changes. Moreover, tones and prosody plays an important role in the morphology of Otomi verbs
(Palancar, 2004; Palancar, 2016). Also, we mentioned before that many of the afﬁxes concatenations
in Otomi take place in derivative processes. Derivation tends to be less predictable than inﬂection phe-
nomena (derivation is less frequent and less regular), and this could be an additional reason of why the
entropy values of this language are high.

4 Conclusions

In this work we used corpus based measures like TTR, entropy and perplexity for exploring the mor-
phological complexity of three languages, using two small parallel corpora. We use TTR as a measure
of morphological productivity of a language, and we use the entropy and perplexity calculated over a
sequence of morphs, as a measure of predictability.

There may be a common believe that polysynthetical languages are far more complex than analytic
ones. However, it is important to take into account the many factors that lay a role in the complexity of
the system. We stressed out that morphological complexity has several dimensions that must be taken
into account (Baerman et al., 2015).

While some agglutinative polysynthetical languages, like Nahuatl, could be considered complex by
the number of morphemes the combinations and the information than can be encoded in a single word;
the sequence of these elements may be more predictable than fusional languages like Spanish.

Languages like Otomi, showed high complexity in the two dimensions that we focused in this work

(this is consistent with qualitative perspectives (Palancar, 2016)).

These two dimensions of complexity are valid and complementary. Measures like TTR reﬂect the
amount of information that words can encode in a language, languages that have a high TTR have the
potential of encoding a lot of functions at the word level, therefore, they produce many different word
forms. Perplexity and entropy measured over a sequence of morphs reﬂect the predictability or degree
of uncertainty of these combinations. The higher the entropy (hence, the perplexity), the higher the
uncertainty in the combinations of morphs.

This was a preliminary work. Deeper linguistic analysis, more corpora and more languages are
needed. However, we believe that quantitative measures extracted from parallel corpora can comple-
ment and deepen the study of linguistic complexity. Efforts are currently being made (Bane, 2008).
However, more studies are needed, especially for low resources languages.

354.1 Future work
Languages of the world have a wide range of functions that can be codiﬁed at the world level. Therefore,
it would be interesting to consider the study of more complexity dimensions in our work. Popular
quantitative approaches are successful in reﬂecting how many morphs can be combined into a single
word. However, it is also important to take into account how complex the format of a word can be, i.e.,
not only how many elements can be combined but also what type of elements. For example, Dahl (2009)
argues that when a phoneme is added to a word, this process is not as complex as adding a tone.

Another interesting dimension is the complexity of the morphology in terms of acquisition (of native
and L2 speakers). Miestamo (2008) points out that this typo of complexity should be made on the basis
of psycho-linguistics analysis in both processing and acquisition.

Finally, one important factor that inﬂuences language complexity is culture.

In many languages,
pragmatics nuances are produced via morphological processes. For instance, languages like Nahuatl
have a complex honoriﬁc or reverential system that is expressed using different types of afﬁxes. Spanish
expresses this type of phenomena with morphosyntactic processes. It is a challenging task to be able to
quantify all these factors that play a role in the complexity of a language.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Mexican Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT), fund 2016-
01-2225, and CB-2016/408885. We also thank the reviewers for their valuable comments and to our
friend Morris´e P. Martinez for his unconditional support.

References
Farrell Ackerman and Robert Malouf. 2013. Morphological organization: The low conditional entropy conjec-

ture. Language, 89(3):429–464.

Vivien Altmann and Gabriel Altmann. 2008. Anleitung zu quantitativen textanalysen. Methoden und Anwendun-

gen.

Stephen R Anderson. 2015. Dimensions of morphological complexity. Understanding and measuring morpho-

logical complexity, pages 11–26.

Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman. 2011. What is morphology?, volume 8. John Wiley & Sons.

Matthew Baerman, Dunstan Brown, and Greville G Corbett. 2015. Understanding and measuring morphological

complexity. Oxford University Press, USA.

Matthew Baerman. 2012. Paradigmatic chaos in nuer. Language, 88(3):467–494.

Max Bane. 2008. Quantifying and measuring morphological complexity. In Proceedings of the 26th west coast

conference on formal linguistics, pages 69–76. Somerville, MA, USA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.

Christian Bentz, Tatjana Soldatova, Alexander Koplenig, and Tanja Samardˇzi´c. 2016. A comparison between

morphological complexity measures: typological data vs. language corpora.

James P Blevins. 2013. The information-theoretic turn. Psihologija, 46(4):355–375.

Gilles Boy´e and Patricia Hofherr. 2006. The structure of allomorphy in spanish verbal inﬂection. Cuadernos de

Ling¨u´ıstica del Instituto Universitario Ortega y Gasset, 13:9–24.

Peter F Brown, Peter V Desouza, Robert L Mercer, Vincent J Della Pietra, and Jenifer C Lai. 1992. Class-based

n-gram models of natural language. Computational linguistics, 18(4):467–479.

Joan Bybee. 2010. Language, usage and cognition. Cambridge University Press.

Stanley F Chen and Joshua Goodman. 1999. An empirical study of smoothing techniques for language modeling.

Computer Speech & Language, 13(4):359–394.

¨Osten Dahl. 2009. Testing the assumption of complexity invariance: The case of Elfdalian and Swedish. na.

36Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques, Gerardo Sierra, and Isaac Hernandez Pompa. 2016. Axolotl: a web accessible parallel
corpus for spanish-nahuatl. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2016).

Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques. 2017. Exploring bilingual lexicon extraction for Spanish-Nahuatl. In ACL Workshop

in Women and Underrepresenting Minorities in Natural Language Processing.

Martin Haspelmath and Andrea Sims. 2013. Understanding morphology. Routledge.

Gustav Herdan. 1966. The advanced theory of language as choice and chance. Springer-Verlag New York.

Justine Kao and Dan Jurafsky. 2012. A computational analysis of style, affect, and imagery in contemporary
poetry. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2012 Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature, pages
8–17.

Emmerich Kelih. 2010. The type-token relationship in slavic parallel texts. Glottometrics, 20:1–11.

Kimmo Kettunen. 2014. Can type-token ratio be used to show morphological complexity of languages? Journal

of Quantitative Linguistics, 21(3):223–245.

Yolanda Lastra. 1992. El otom´ı de Toluca. IIA, UNAM.

David Malvern and Brian Richards. 2002. Investigating accommodation in language proﬁciency interviews using

a new measure of lexical diversity. Language testing, 19(1):85–104.

Thomas Mayer, Bernhard W¨alchli, Christian Rohrdantz, and Michael Hund. 2014. From the extraction of con-
tinuous features in parallel texts to visual analytics of heterogeneous areal-typological datasets. Language
Processing and Grammars. The role of functionally oriented computational models, pages 13–38.

Matti Miestamo. 2008. Grammatical complexity in a cross-linguistic perspective. Language complexity: Typol-

ogy, contact, change, pages 23–41.

David Mitchell. 2015. Type-token models: a comparative study. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 22(1):1–21.

Fabio Montermini and Olivier Bonami. 2013. Stem spaces and predictability in verbal inﬂection. Lingue e

linguaggio, 12(2):171–190.

Enrique L Palancar. 2004. Verbal morphology and prosody in otomi. International journal of American linguis-

tics, 70(3):251–278.

Enrique L Palancar. 2012. The conjugation classes of tilapa otomi: An approach from canonical typology.

Enrique L Palancar. 2016. A typology of tone and inﬂection: A view from the oto-manguean languages of

mexico. Tone and inﬂection: New facts and new perspectives, pages 109–139.

Geoffrey Sampson, David Gil, and Peter Trudgill. 2009. Language complexity as an evolving variable, volume 13.

Oxford University Press.

Claude E Shannon, Warren Weaver, and Arthur W Burks. 1951. The mathematical theory of communication.

Efstathios Stamatatos. 2009. A survey of modern authorship attribution methods. Journal of the American Society

for information Science and Technology, 60(3):538–556.

Sami Virpioja, Peter Smit, Stig-Arne Gr¨onroos, Mikko Kurimo, et al. 2013. Morfessor 2.0: Python implementa-

tion and extensions for morfessor baseline.

37