Iterative development of family history annotation guidelines using a

synthetic corpus of clinical text

Taraka Rama∗ Pål H. Brekke† Øystein Nytrø‡ Lilja Øvrelid∗

∗University of Oslo, Department of Informatics

†Oslo University Hospital, Department of Cardiology, Center for Cardiological Innovation

‡Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science

tarakark@ifi.uio.no,pabrek@ous-hf.no,nytroe@ntnu.no,liljao@ifi.uio.no

Abstract

In this article, we describe the development of
annotation guidelines for family history infor-
mation in Norwegian clinical text. We make
use of incrementally developed synthetic clin-
ical text describing patients’ family history re-
lating to cases of cardiac disease and present
a general methodology which integrates the
synthetically produced clinical statements and
guideline development. We analyze inter-
annotator agreement based on the developed
guidelines and present results from experi-
ments aimed at evaluating the validity and ap-
plicability of the annotated corpus using ma-
chine learning techniques. The resulting anno-
tated corpus contains 477 sentences and 6030
tokens. Both the annotation guidelines and the
annotated corpus are made freely available and
as such constitutes the ﬁrst publicly available
resource of Norwegian clinical text.

Introduction

1
The limited availability of clinical text corpora
constitutes a major challenge for the develop-
ment of clinical NLP tools.
Such text origi-
nates in the (electronic) health record (EHR), and
access to and use of the EHR is governed by
strict data privacy and health service regulations,
which usually restricts secondary use and pro-
hibits re-distribution and sharing with the larger
NLP community. Among notable exceptions are
anonymized health record texts published as part
of the i2b2 challenges (Uzuner and Stubbs, 2015)
and the CLEF corpus (Roberts et al., 2008b). For
languages other than English the situation is even
more difﬁcult, and despite notable annotation ef-
forts (Dalianis et al., 2012), the underlying corpora
are largely unavailable.

Clinical texts are radically different in form and
function from other biomedical texts: They are
communicative, conveying information between

health service providers, terse (in that the patient
is implicit), and very specialized according to the
role of the narrative and profession of the author
(Allvin et al., 2010; Røst et al., 2008).
In this
work, the targeted narrative of family history cor-
responds to the anamnesis recorded by the cardi-
ologist when interviewing the patient as part of a
consultation. However, lacking a corpus of family
history statements, we decided to develop a syn-
thetic corpus (Lohr et al., 2018; Boag et al., 2018).
Development of most NLP tools requires man-
ually annotated data and the design of annotation
guidelines is crucial for consistent and high qual-
ity data suitable for machine learning and classiﬁ-
cation. Development of annotation guidelines is a
time consuming process which in the case of clin-
ical data often also requires access to domain ex-
perts (clinicians). The question of how to involve
the clinician in the annotation process and make
the best use of their domain knowledge is there-
fore highly relevant.

This article describes the systematic develop-
ment of annotation guidelines for family history
information in Norwegian clinical text. We make
use of incrementally developed synthetic clinical
text describing patients’ family history relating to
cases of cardiac diseases. The domain expert is
an integral part of this methodology and generates
synthetic examples that challenge the guidelines
and further participates both in the annotation and
development of guidelines. In doing so, the do-
main knowledge of the clinician informs the anno-
tation process systematically. Measures of inter-
annotator agreement is actively used to improve
the annotation guideline, as well as to extend the
synthetic corpus and range of annotated concepts.
In the rest of the paper, we describe the method-
ology for corpus generation and annotation guide-
line design in more detail and provide an overview
of our current state of progress in the fam-

Proceedingsofthe9thInternationalWorkshoponHealthTextMiningandInformationAnalysis(LOUHI2018),pages111–121Brussels,Belgium,October31,2018.c(cid:13)2018AssociationforComputationalLinguistics111ily history domain. We analyse inter-annotator
agreement based on the developed guidelines and
present results from experiments aimed at evalu-
ating the validity and applicability of the purpose-
made annotated corpus using machine learning.

2 Family history in clinical text
A family history is an important part of the med-
ical record.
It helps the clinician in identifying
risk factors, in diagnosing conditions that have ge-
netic components, and in identifying family mem-
bers that should be offered genetic counselling or
medical follow up. Speciﬁc patterns of disease
or symptoms in a family suggest modes of inheri-
tance, and could be helpful in the diagnosis of an
unrecognised disease or syndrome. For example,
if only men in the family are affected, one might
expect an X-linked trait, or if approximately half
of the offspring in a generation seem to be af-
fected, it would suggest an autosomal dominant
disease. In the cases where a pathological muta-
tion has already been identiﬁed, the pedigree is
used to plan further genetic screening or coun-
selling. Figure 1 shows an example pedigree with
a typical autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.
For some diseases, the course of events in the
patient’s family are important in judging the pa-
tient’s own risk of serious events. In patients with
hereditary hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the Eu-
ropean Society of Cardiology recommends using
an online risk calculator to estimate a patient’s 5
year risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD). Among
the seven factors included in the underlying model
– a strong contributor to individual risk – is a his-
tory of SCD in ﬁrst degree relatives (Elliott et al.,
2014).

Family histories occur as descriptive text in the
EHR, but acknowledging that computational rea-
soning about family history have substantial ben-
eﬁts in research, diagnosis and decision support
where many tools has been developed for inter-
active pedigree input (Welch et al., 2018). The
underlying objective of our NLP challenge is to
be able to infer the pedigree of a patient from
text. However, even checking consistency of fam-
ily history information represented in OWL proves
to be a challenge (Stevens et al., 2014). A po-
tential outcome of our work would be to trans-
form statements about pedigree into tabular for-
mats directly usable in risk calculators and for
bioinformatics application like genome-wide anal-

Figure 1: An example pedigree chart with a typical
autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Horizontal
rows represent generations, lines represent relation-
ships, lines of descent and sibship. Squares are male,
circles female, and diamond shape is unknown gender.
A symbol with a ‘P’ inside denotes a pregnancy. Diag-
onal lines through symbols denote deceased individu-
als and the text below their age at the time of death (eg.
‘d. 43’ means died when 43 years old). Filled sym-
bols represent individuals with manifest disease, sym-
bols with a vertical line are healthy gene carriers who
may develop disease later. The small arrow denotes the
current patient (“self”) and the arrow with the ‘P’ is the
proband or index patient where the genetic analysis of
the family started (Bennett et al., 2008).

ysis (Hiekkalinna et al., 2005).

2.1 Previous work
There has been some previous work aimed at ex-
tracting family history information from clinical
text. Bill et al. (2014) annotate 284 sentences from
the publicly available MTSamples corpus of syn-
thetically produced English clinical text for infor-
mation about family members and clinical obser-
vations with some additional attributes (vital sta-
tus, negation and age of death). However, they do
not provide any measures of inter-annotator agree-
ment. Polubriaginof et al. (2015) compared the in-
formation contained in structured and free-text de-
scriptions of family history information and found
that the free-text descriptions were more compre-
hensive.

In another work, Goryachev et al. (2008) de-
veloped a pipeline of rule based systems to detect
family members and diagnosis concepts; and, then
assign the family diagnosis to a speciﬁc family
number. The authors run standard NLP tools such
as sentence splitter and part-of-speech taggers on

112discharge summary notes. The pipeline system is
related to Friedlin and McDonald (2006) in only
identifying diagnosis concepts that are present in
standard medical dictionaries and do not perform
relation extraction as performed in this paper.

Both rule based systems (Abacha and Zweigen-
baum, 2011) and machine learning methods such
as Roberts et al. (2008a) and Minard et al. (2011)
use multi-class SVMs to perform relation extrac-
tion from clinical reports. Our work in this pa-
per is closest to the work of Roberts et al. (2008a)
who manually annotated cancer narratives for en-
tities and relations and, then, trained and tested a
one-vs-rest SVM classiﬁer for training and testing.
In this paper, we employ widely used features in
general purpose named entity recognition (Hong,
2005; Miwa and Sasaki, 2014) to train the SVM
models.

3

Incremental annotation guideline and
synthetic corpus development

One immediate goal of this work is to develop a
tool for the extraction of family history informa-
tion from Norwegian clinical text. Due to the un-
availability of the real health records describing
family histories, we developed a methodology for
annotation guideline development which makes
use of an incrementally developed synthetic cor-
pus. The textual data contained in the corpus was
produced by a clinician who has extensive expe-
rience with clinical work and genetic cardiology.
The data consists of statements that summarize
the family history of a patient and will typically
correspond to a small part of a patient journal.
The descriptions were made by performing web
searches for images of “autosomal dominant pedi-
gree”, and pseudo-randomly describing parts of
the displayed pedigrees while assigning invented
but realistic medical events. No real patient his-
tories are reproduced, but coincidental similarities
must be expected. The text does not contain any
personal identiﬁcation information.

The ﬁrst step in a semantic annotation of text
is to decide upon the entities and the relations
that are interesting to extract or characterize.
Biomedicine employs terminologies and classiﬁ-
cations that may be used for annotation (Savova
et al., 2010).
In our domain of family history,
we started with family members and relationships,
and largely ignored medical conditions apart from
death or known (cardiac) disease in general.

Figure 2: Incremental development of corpus and an-
notation guidelines

The guideline developers consisted of a clini-
cian and three computational linguists and/or com-
puter scientists. We usually maintained two roles:
The clinician would produce a set of representa-
tive sentences and along with one of the others
propose an annotation scheme for these. Then, the
clinician would annotate while another indepen-
dent person not involved in the design of the an-
notation scheme would make an independent an-
notation. The results were compared and discrep-
ancies were recorded. We (sometimes artiﬁcially)
could identify both semantic and pragmatic dis-
crepancies. Semantic discrepancy would signify
a misunderstanding of the underlying domain and
required amending the ontology, whereas the prag-
matic discrepancy would uncover an underspeci-
ﬁed or incomplete annotation rule which could be
further speciﬁed by adding more examples to the
corpus. The drivers and amendments in this quiz-
like game is shown in the table 1.

Figure 2 shows the double loops of corpus pro-
duction and guideline development. As shown,
the family history statements were produced it-
In the initial round, the clinician was
eratively.

113Add to GuidelineAdd phrasesCorpusClinicianannotationIndependent annotationAnnotatedcorpusAnnotated corpusAnnotation GuidelineAlignmentCorpus revisionRevisedcorpus RevisedAnnotationGuidelineStartGuidelinerevisionDriver
Semantic dis-
crepancy
Pragmatic
discrepancy

Amendment
Add concept or
revise guideline
Add sentence to
corpus

Guideline
iteration
Corpus
Iteration

Table 1: Drivers and amendments guiding the develop-
ment of annotation guidelines.

asked to produce a set of representative statements
about SCD-related family history. Example 1 be-
low shows a sentence from the corpus.

(1)

onkel
uncle

er
is
som
who

hans
his
hatt
had

på
on
hjertestans
cardiac-arrest

Indekspasienten
Index-patient
farssiden,
father’s-side,
fått
had
‘The index patient is his uncle on the father’s
side, who had cardiac arrest and implanted ICD.

implantert
implanted

ICD.
ICD.

og
and

Following the initial iterations and discussions
with the clinician the need to account for i) re-
lations to groups of family members, ii) tempo-
ral statements, and iii) negation emerged. Dur-
ing this iteration the clinician was therefore tasked
with the generation of statements that challenged
the current guidelines, whilst still producing rep-
resentative family statements. Example 2 shows
an example sentence containing a temporal state-
ment and example 3 shows another type of tem-
poral statement describing the age of the family
member at the time of diagnosis.

har
has

hjertebank
heart-palps

kjent
felt
månedene.
months

(2) Han
He
ﬁre-fem
four-ﬁve
‘He has been feeling heart palpitations during the
last four-ﬁve months’

siste
last

de
the

(3) Broren

ﬁkk
got

diagnosen
diagnosis

i
i

femti-årene.
ﬁfty-years

Brother-the
‘The brother was diagnosed in his ﬁfties’

After arriving at a fairly stable set of guidelines,
a large portion of the data set (320 sentences) was
doubly annotated. Following this, disagreements
were resolved in a round of consolidation between
the annotators. The ﬁnal portion of the data set
(91 sentences) was then annotated doubly and the
resulting inter-annotator agreement on these data
sets is reported here in Section 4.5.

All annotation was performed using the Brat
web-based annotation tool (Stenetorp et al., 2012).
The data was manually segmented and tokenized
prior to annotation.

4 Annotation guidelines
The following section presents an overview of the
resulting annotation guidelines. The annotation
of the corpus distinguishes semantically relevant
clinical entities and shows how these relate to each
other in the text via a set of relations. Figure
4 shows a graphical overview of the annotation
schema, where rectangles indicate core clinical en-
tities, ovals indicate modiﬁer entities, and all pos-
sible relations are indicated by directed arcs.

4.1 Clinical entities
Clinical entities are marked with one of the fol-
lowing entity types:

• Family describes various family members
(e.g. onkelen ‘the uncle’, bestefar ‘grandfa-
ther’).

• Self is used only for the patient under con-
sideration (e.g. pasienten ‘the patient’, hun
‘she’).

• Index entities designate the property of be-
ing the index patient or proband, i.e.
the
ﬁrst identiﬁed family member with disease
indekspasienten ‘the index patient’.

• Condition entities describe a range of
clinical conditions such as diseases (ko-
ronarsykdom ‘coronary disease’), diagnoses,
various types of mutations,
results
(testet negativt ‘tested negative’), treatments
(hjertetransplantert
‘heart-transplanted’),
and vital state (død ‘dead’, frisk ‘healthy’).
• Event entities describe clinical events (e.g.
hjertestans ‘cardiac arrest’ and synkope ‘syn-
cope’).

test

The distinction between conditions and events re-
late to the temporal extension of the entity de-
scribed: an event is something that happens and
then is over, but a condition is a prolonged state
of the patient, for instance, the patient has a heart
attack (Event), but from this point on she is con-
sidered to have heart disease (Condition).

In addition to the main clinical entities de-
scribed above, the annotation guidelines also dis-
tinguish a set of modiﬁer entities that further de-

114Amount

Age

Side

NEG

Temporal

Self

9a, 9b, 9c

Family

3

2

Condition

Event

Index

6

4

1

5

7

Figure 3: Schematic diagram showing the possible relations between entities. The different relations are marked
with a number to avoid cluttering. Holder: 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8; Modifier: Dotted lines; Related_to: 3, 9a;
Subset: 9b; Partner: 9c.

Holder

Holder

Related_to

Modifier

Self

Pasientens
Patient’s

Family

søster ﬁkk
got
sister

Condition

diagnosen
diagnosis

forbindelse med en synkope for
i
in conjunction with a syncope for

Event

Temporal

ﬁre
four

år

siden
years ago

Figure 4: Annotation of clinical entities and relations for an example sentence from the corpus.

scribe the clinical entities for a number of proper-
ties that are relevant for semantic interpretation of
family history information:

• Side entities describe the side of the fam-
ily and thus modify Family entities (e.g.
farssiden ‘paternal side’).

• Age entities describe the age of a family

member 40 år gammel ‘40 years old’.

• Negation entities mark lexical items that
signal negation, so-called negation cues in
the terminology of Morante and Daelemans
(2012). These may be negative adverbs, such
as e.g., ikke ‘not’, aldri ‘never’, or negative
determiners/pronouns ingen ‘nobody’. Note
that in contrast to Morante and Daelemans
(2012), we do not annotate morphological
negation cues (e.g. im-possible). In this ver-
sion of the guidelines, we treat negation as
encompassing uncertainty. The main reason
for this is that just like the presence of nega-
tion, it marks missing information in the fam-
ily history.

• Amount modiﬁers describe quantiﬁers that
describe numerical properties of clinical en-
tities, e.g. to ‘two’, mange ‘many’.

• Temporal modiﬁers

typically position
Condition/Event entities in time, e.g. i
sommer ‘this summer’, for tre år siden ‘three
years ago’. These are similar to temporal
expressions (so-called timexes) in previous
temporal annotation schemes (Ferro et al.,
2002; Saurí et al., 2006).

4.2 Family history relations
In addition to the clinical entities described above,
we further annotate a number of relationships be-
tween entities in our annotation scheme. Example
4 shows a fully annotated example containing en-
tities and their relations for an sentence from the
corpus. The relations are binary undirected rela-
tions of the following types:

• Holder relations

are

always between
Condition/Event entity on the one hand
and its holder, a Family/Self/Index
entity.

115• Modifier relations hold between modiﬁer
entities (e.g. Side, Negation) and clini-
cal entities (e.g. Family, Condition).
• Related_to relations specify relations be-
tween family members and always hold be-
tween entities of the Family type.

• Subset relations specify relations between
family members, where one is a subset of the
in statements such as Hun har
other, e.g.
to brødre, den ene har mutasjonen ‘She has
two brothers, one of them has the mutation’,
where den ene ‘one of them’ would be con-
nected to the Family entity brødre ‘broth-
ers’ with a Subset-relation.

• Partner relations specify relations be-
tween entities of the Family type, used to
identify couples (husbands and wives, civil
partnerships) that are able to provide off-
spring. The assumption is no kinship.

4.3 Span of annotations
In general, annotation should pick out the mini-
mal span in the text which denotes the entity or
property in question. This will most often be a
single word (onkel ‘uncle’, mutasjon ‘mutation’)
but will in some cases also include more than one
word (plutselig hjertedød ‘sudden cardiac death’,
voksende hjerte ‘growing heart’). Genitive mod-
farens ‘father’s’ in farens
iﬁers of an entity, e.g.
søster ‘the father’s sister’ or Søsteren til faren ‘the
sister of the father’ should not be included in the
annotation span. Rather, these are annotated as
two separate entities related by a Related_to
relation. The span of Family entities usually en-
compass only the family term itself (onkel ‘uncle’,
søster ‘sister’), however, when the family term is
described using a pronominal element (hun ‘she’,
den ene ‘one (of them)’) this should be annotated
as a family entity. When both are present (den ene
broren ‘the one brother’) only the family term is
annotated.

Temporal expressions will often be more com-
plex and should include both numerical expres-
sions denoting amount (tre ‘three’, ﬂere ‘several’),
temporal units such as month/year, as well as ex-
pressions denoting temporal ordering or duration
(i ‘in’, siden ‘since’ as in tre år siden ‘three years
since’, i tre år ‘for three years’). Initial iterations
of annotation showed that agreement for this cat-
egory was low due to differences in annotation
span. We therefore introduced the generalization

Entities
Family
Condition
Event
Self
Amount
Temporal
Negation
Age
Side
Index

Relations
Holder
Modiﬁer
Related_to
Subset
Partner

Number Spans

1704
681
542
509
273
214
131
57
36
7

96
135
115
–
9
178
33
34
3
–

Number Spans

880
687
389
108
14

–
–
–
–
–

Table 2: Distribution of entities and relations in the data
annotated by the clinician. The Spans column shows
the number of entities that span across words. Both the
entities and relations are sorted in decreasing order of
number of occurrences.

that temporal annotation should make use of a re-
placement rule where the full constituent replaced
by a temporal pronoun corresponding to English
then is annotated. This means that unlike e.g.
Ferro et al. (2002), our temporal annotations will
include prepositions (e.g. i tre år ‘for three years’).

4.4 Statistics
The resulting annotated corpus contains 477 sen-
tences and 6030 tokens. In table 2 we present the
distribution of the entities and relations in the cor-
pus. We see that Condition and Event entities
are fairly equally distributed in the corpus. Tem-
poral modiﬁers span more than one word in a ma-
jority of cases. Whereas Holder-relations are the
most common type of relation in the corpus, there
are only 14 cases of the Partner relation.

Inter-Annotator Agreement

4.5
As described in Section 3, two ﬁnal rounds of an-
notation with different second annotators (in ad-
dition to the clinician, here dubbed A1 and A2)
were used to complete the annotation guidelines.
We measured the inter-annotator agreement at two
levels. At the ﬁrst level, IAA is based on match of
the entities spans and their labels. At the second

116level, IAA is based on the relationship matches
between the matched spans. Therefore, the rela-
tionship agreement measurement is stricter than
the entity level agreement measurement. We ex-
amine token level agreement where we treat the
clinician’s notes as gold standard and compute the
per token F-measures i.e., Precision, Recall, and
F1-score. We measure the inter-annotator agree-
ment using micro F1-score. The Precision, Recall,
and F1-scores of the agreement is provided in table
3.

A1, 320

Annotator Precision Recall F1-score
0.692
0.599
0.809
0.713

0.743
0.645
0.821
0.752

0.648
0.559
0.797
0.678

A2, 91

Table 3: Each row shows the number of sentences an-
notated by each annotator. The ﬁrst and second rows
shows the Precision, Recall, and F1-score for entities
and relations. All the results are in comparison to the
texts annotated by the clinician.

We ﬁnd that the round of consolidation and im-
provement of the guidelines was useful and im-
proves the IAA scores for both entities and rela-
tions. When we compare the annotations of the
clinician (A0) and the second additional annotator
(A2), we ﬁnd that there are still a number of re-
maining discrepancies. Some of these are what we
termed semantic discrepancies above in Section 3
above, annotation decisions that require domain
knowledge. For instance, in several places A2
annotates clinical conditions that are not marked
by the clinician, e.g. marking symptomer ‘symp-
toms’ as a Condition. There are also examples
where additional distinctions should probably be
added to the guidelines, in particular with respect
to annotation of temporal and negation-related in-
formation, both examples of complex annotation
tasks by themselves. For instance, A2 annotates
the phrase under en ﬂytur til Spania ‘during a
ﬂight to Spain’ as Temporal, where A0 does not.
With respect to negation, the distinction between
negation and uncertainty causes differences in an-
notation spans, where A0 annotates husker ikke
‘does not remember’ as NEG, whereas A2 anno-
tates only ikke ‘not’.

5 Preliminary experiments
In this section, we perform entity classiﬁcation
and relation extraction experiments to verify the
viability of our annotation. We train and test SVM
model on the data annotated by the domain expert
in ﬁve-fold cross-validation fashion. The domain
expert annotated dataset has 477 sentences and we
performed ﬁve-fold cross-validation to train and
test our model.
In all our experiments, we split
the sentences into ﬁve folds and extracted entities
and relations. Then, we treated each of ﬁve folds
as test dataset and trained on the other four folds
in an iterative fashion.

5.1 Entity detection
In this experiment, we trained and tested a lin-
ear classiﬁer (SVM model) for entity classiﬁca-
tion. We treat entity classiﬁcation as a multi-class
classiﬁcation problem where there are 11 classes
including the O entity that denotes unmarked lex-
ical units. Our model is a linear SVM model that
is trained on the following features:

• Lexical: Current word, words in a context

window size of 2.

• Universal POS tags: Current word, words in

a context window size of 2.

• Entity tags: The two previous entity tags
where the model uses the gold entity tags to
train but uses the previous predicted entity
tags to predict the current tag.

We also experimented with lowercasing a word
and orthographic features such as preﬁxes and suf-
ﬁxes of length 3 which did not improve the perfor-
mance of the SVM model. We evaluate the per-
formance of the SVM model using weighted F1
score to account for class imbalance. On an aver-
age, these feature templates yielded 5000 features
across the ﬁve cross-validation experiments. All
the Universal POS tags are obtained through the
CoNLL17 Baseline model (Zeman et al., 2017)
trained on the publicly available Universal Depen-
dencies Norwegian Bokmål treebank (Øvrelid and
Hohle, 2016). We used the majority class “O”
as the baseline in our experiments. The results
of our experiments are given in table 4.
It has
to be noted that these results are not comparable
to the IAA scores presented in table 3, which are
calculated only over entities and completely dis-
regard the remaining tokens. Moreover, the IAA

117System
Baseline
SVM

Precision Recall F1-score
0.429
0.841

0.34
0.843

0.582
0.843

Table 4: The average of the weighted F1-scores across
the ﬁve folds. On an average, there are 6030 training
instances and 1507 test instances.

score is computed only on parts of the annotated
data whereas the SVM models are trained and
tested on the whole of the data annotated by A0.
The SVM model performs better than the majority
class baseline model across all the measures. The
SVM model made errors at distinguishing Con-
dition entities from Event entities and Age from
Temporal entities. Most of the errors occurred
when the SVM model misclassiﬁed the rest of the
classes as “O”.

5.2 Relation extraction
In this subsection, we performed a relation detec-
tion and classiﬁcation experiment. In this experi-
ment, we treat a relation deﬁned between exactly
two entities to belong to one of the six relations
where ﬁve of them are given in table 2 and the
sixth relation is “No_Relation”. We train and test
an SVM model in a ﬁve-fold cross-validation fash-
ion. Apart from entity labels, we experimented
with increasingly complex set of features:

• Lexical: Words belonging to the entities are

treated as two separate features.

• POS tags: Universal POS tags of the entities’

lexical tokens as separate features.

• Dependency features: The dependency label
of a entity word’s incoming arc as a feature.

If a entity is spanning across multiple words,
we concatenate the per-word feature and treated
them as a single feature when training and test-
ing the SVM model. The results of the experi-
ments are given in table 5. Our results suggest
that word based features themselves yield a per-
formance which is close to the model with more
complex features. Incremental inclusion of POS
tags and dependency labels increases the perfor-
mance of the SVM model, whereas the inclusion
of predicted entity labels does not improve the per-
formance of the SVM model. We experimented if
including the gold standard labels would improve
the performance of the SVM model. We ﬁnd that

the quality of entity labels does improve the per-
formance of the model.

Finally, we present the confusion matrix for
the best fold is presented in table 6. The SVM
model makes most of the errors when it mis-
classiﬁes one of the ﬁve annotated relations as
“No_Relation” and vice-versa. The classiﬁer errs
when distinguishing between “Related_to”, “Part-
ner” and “Subset” relations. Finally, the classi-
ﬁer makes errors when distinguishing between the
Norwegian indeﬁnite determiner en which is un-
marked and the quantiﬁer en.

Features
Words
+POS tags
+Dependency labels
+Entity labels (Predicted)
+Entity labels (Gold)

Precision Recall F1-score
0.719
0.731
0.743
0.743
0.768

0.732
0.738
0.746
0.745
0.767

0.716
0.73
0.743
0.743
0.771

Table 5: Average of the weighted F1-scores on ﬁve fold
cross-validation. On an average, there are 5530 training
instances and 1461 test instances.

Holder Modiﬁer No_Relation Partner Related_to Subset

Holder
Modiﬁer
No_Relation
Partner
Related_to
Subset

127
2
65
0
7
0

1
82
100
0
0
0

54
66
1045

0
22
11

0
0
1
2
0
0

1
0
30
3
58
4

0
0
15
0
2
13

Table 6: Confusion matrix for the SVM model at the
task of relation extraction on the best performing fold.

6 Discussion
The validity of our study is limited by using syn-
thetic data. While the clinician producing the clin-
ical text works in genetic cardiology, and writes
similar patient histories in his clinical practice, the
synthetic data can not be expected to be fully rep-
resentative of real clinical notes from a large pa-
tient cohort. The analysis pertaining to the syn-
thetic data should be thought of as an illustration
of one iteration of the cycle described in 2, and
the objective of the iterative process is a stepwise,
guided, design of an annotation guideline in a set-
ting where the target text data is unavailable. The
same process could be used with a real corpus,
where speciﬁc new examples would present chal-
lenges driving guideline development. The only
difference is that in our case, a specialist produced
text, instead of ﬁnding representative text.

118The guideline development workﬂow itself may
also be improved or expanded by storing a repre-
sentation of the input data (the pedigree) and link-
ing it to the resulting synthetic text description,
which would allow further downstream compari-
son of extraction results to the actual source mate-
rial.

7 Conclusion
This article has investigated the development of
annotation guidelines for family history informa-
tion in Norwegian by leveraging synthetically pro-
duced clinical text.
Inter-annotator agreement
scores show that the annotation schema can be ap-
plied fairly consistently and that it may also be
generalized to unseen text using machine learn-
ing. Both the annotation guidelines and the anno-
tated corpus will be made freely available and as
such constitutes the ﬁrst freely available resource
of Norwegian clinical text.

In the near future, we will apply the annotation
schema to real clinical texts. The family history is
but a minor part of a patient record, and segmenta-
tion as shown in Bill et al. (2014) is needed. Anal-
ysis of the annotation disagreements along with
the experimental results also highlighted part of
the schema that will need to be further reﬁned, e.g.
the analysis of temporality and our treatment of
uncertainty. We will develop the method for in-
cremental and systematic annotation guideline de-
velopment further. The method will be put to test
when we iteratively improve the current guideline
in order to capture real patient pedigree informa-
tion from the EHR.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to three anonymous reviewers
for constructive comments on the ﬁrst version of
the paper. This work is funded by the Norwe-
gian Research Council and more speciﬁcally by
the BigMed project, an IKTPLUSS Lighthouse
project.

References
Asma Ben Abacha and Pierre Zweigenbaum. 2011.
Automatic extraction of semantic relations between
medical entities: a rule based approach. Journal of
biomedical semantics, 2(5):S4.

Helen Allvin, Elin Carlsson, Hercules Dalianis, Ri-
itta Danielsson-Ojala, Vidas Daudaraviˇcius, Mar-

tin Hassel, Dimitrios Kokkinakis, Heljä Lundgren-
Laine, Gunnar Nilsson, Øystein Nytrø, et al. 2010.
Characteristics and analysis of ﬁnnish and swedish
In Pro-
clinical intensive care nursing narratives.
ceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi
Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Docu-
ments, pages 53–60. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Robin L Bennett, Kathryn Steinhaus French, Robert G
Resta, and Debra Lochner Doyle. 2008. Standard-
ized human pedigree nomenclature: update and as-
sessment of the recommendations of the national so-
ciety of genetic counselors. Journal of genetic coun-
seling, 17(5):424–433.

Robert Bill, Serguei Pakhomov, Elizabeth S Chen,
Tamara J Winden, Elizabeth W Carter,
and
Genevieve B Melton. 2014. Automated extraction
of family history information from clinical notes.
In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, volume
2014, page 1709. American Medical Informatics
Association.

Willie Boag, Tristan Naumann, and Peter Szolovits.
2018.
Towards the creation of a large corpus
of synthetically-identiﬁed clinical notes. CoRR,
abs/1803.02728.

Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hassel, Aron Henriksson,
and Maria Skeppstedt. 2012. Stockholm EPR Cor-
pus: A Clinical Database Used to Improve Health
In Proceedings of the Fourth Swedish Lan-
Care.
guage Technology Conference, pages 17–18.

Perry M Elliott, Aris Anastasakis, Michael A Borger,
Martin Borggrefe, Franco Cecchi, Philippe Char-
ron, Albert Alain Hagege, Antoine Lafont, Giuseppe
Limongelli, Heiko Mahrholdt, William J McKenna,
Jens Mogensen, Petros Nihoyannopoulos, Stefano
Nistri, Petronella G Pieper, Burkert Pieske, Clau-
dio Rapezzi, Frans H Rutten, Christoph Tillmanns,
Hugh Watkins, Additional Contributor, Constanti-
nos O’Mahony, ESC Committee for Practice Guide-
lines (CPG), Jose Luis Zamorano, Stephan Achen-
bach, Helmut Baumgartner, Jeroen J Bax, Héc-
tor Bueno, Veronica Dean, Christi Deaton, Çetin
Erol, Robert Fagard, Roberto Ferrari, David Has-
dai, Arno W Hoes, Paulus Kirchhof, Juhani Knuuti,
Philippe Kolh, Patrizio Lancellotti, Ales Linhart,
Petros Nihoyannopoulos, Massimo F Piepoli, Piotr
Ponikowski, Per Anton Sirnes, Juan Luis Tamargo,
Michal Tendera, Adam Torbicki, William Wijns,
Stephan Windecker, Document Reviewers, David
Hasdai, Piotr Ponikowski, Stephan Achenbach,
Fernando Alfonso, Cristina Basso, Nuno Miguel
Cardim, Juan Ramón Gimeno, Stephane Heymans,
Per Johan Holm, Andre Keren, Paulus Kirchhof,
Philippe Kolh, Christos Lionis, Claudio Muneretto,
Silvia Priori, Maria Jesus Salvador, Christian
Wolpert, Jose Luis Zamorano, Matthias Frick, Farid
Aliyev, Svetlana Komissarova, Georges Mairesse,
Elnur Smaji´c, Vasil Velchev, Loizos Antoniades,

119Ales Linhart, Henning Bundgaard, Tiina Heliö, An-
toine Leenhardt, Hugo A Katus, George Efthymi-
adis, Róbert Sepp, Gunnar Thor Gunnarsson, Shemy
Carasso, Alina Kerimkulova, Ginta Kamzola, Hady
Skouri, Ghada Eldirsi, Ausra Kavoliuniene, Tiziana
Felice, Michelle Michels, Kristina Hermann Hau-
gaa, Radosław Lenarczyk, Dulce Brito, Eduard Ape-
trei, Leo Bokheria, Dragan Lovic, Robert Hatala,
Pablo Garcia Pavía, Maria Eriksson, Stéphane No-
ble, Elizabeta Srbinovska, Murat Özdemir, Elena
Nesukay, and Neha Sekhri. 2014. 2014 esc guide-
lines on diagnosis and management of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy:
the task force for the diagnosis
and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of
the european society of cardiology (esc). European
heart journal, 35(39).

L. Ferro, L. Gerber, I. Mani, B. Sundheim, and G. Wil-
son. 2002.
Instruction manual for the annotation
of temporal expressions. Technical report, MITRE,
Washington C3 Cen- ter, McLean, Virginia.

Jeff Friedlin and Clement J McDonald. 2006. Us-
ing a natural language processing system to extract
and code family history data from admission reports.
In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, volume
2006, page 925. American Medical Informatics As-
sociation.

Sergey Goryachev, Hyeoneui Kim, and Qing Zeng-
Treitler. 2008.
Identiﬁcation and extraction of
family history information from clinical reports.
In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, volume
2008, page 247. American Medical Informatics As-
sociation.

Tero Hiekkalinna, Joseph D. Terwilliger, Sampo Sam-
malisto, Leena Peltonen, and Markus Perola. 2005.
Autogscan: Powerful tools for automated genome-
wide linkage and linkage disequilibrium analysis.
Twin Research and Human Genetics, 8(1):16–21.

Gumwon Hong. 2005. Relation extraction using sup-
In International Conference
port vector machine.
on Natural Language Processing, pages 366–377.
Springer.

Christina Lohr, Sven Buechel, and Udo Hahn. 2018.
Sharing copies of synthetic clinical corpora without
physical distribution — a case study to get around
IPRs and privacy constraints featuring the German
JSYNCC corpus. In Proceedings of the Eleventh In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, pages 1259 – 1266, Miyazaki, Japan.

Anne-Lyse Minard, Anne-Laure Ligozat, and Brigitte
Grau. 2011. Multi-class svm for relation extraction
from clinical reports. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing 2011, pages 604–609.

Makoto Miwa and Yutaka Sasaki. 2014. Modeling
joint entity and relation extraction with table repre-
sentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), pages 1858–1869.

Roser Morante

and Walter Daelemans.

2012.
Conandoyle-neg: Annotation of negation cues
In Pro-
and their scope in conan doyle stories.
ceedings of
the Eighth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2012). European Language Resources Association
(ELRA).

Lilja Øvrelid and Petter Hohle. 2016. Universal De-
pendencies for Norwegian. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).

Fernanda Polubriaginof, Nicholas P Tatonetti, and
David K Vawdrey. 2015. An assessment of family
history information captured in an electronic health
In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings,
record.
volume 2015, page 2035. American Medical Infor-
matics Association.

Angus Roberts, Robert Gaizauskas, and Mark Hep-
ple. 2008a. Extracting clinical relationships from
patient narratives. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language
Processing, pages 10–18. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Angus Roberts, Robert Gaizauskas, Mark Hepple,
George Demetriou, Yikun Guo, Andrea Setzer, and
Ian Roberts. 2008b. Semantic annotation of clin-
In Proceedings of the
ical text: The clef corpus.
LREC 2008 workshop on building and evaluating
resources for biomedical text mining, pages 19–26.

Thomas Brox Røst, Ola Huseth, Øystein Nytrø, and
Anders Grimsmo. 2008. Lessons from develop-
ing an annotated corpus of patient histories. JCSE,
2(2):162–179.

R. Saurí, J. Littman, B. Knippen, R. Gaizauskas,
A. Setzer, and J. Pustejovsky. 2006. TimeML an-
notation guidelines version 1.2. 1. Technical report,
LDC.

Guergana K Savova, James J Masanz, Philip V Ogren,
Jiaping Zheng, Sunghwan Sohn, Karin C Kipper-
Schuler, and Christopher G Chute. 2010. Mayo clin-
ical text analysis and knowledge extraction system
(ctakes): architecture, component evaluation and ap-
plications. Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association, 17(5):507–513.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topi´c,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. brat: a web-based tool for nlp-assisted text
In Proceedings of the Demonstrations
annotation.
Session at EACL 2012, pages 102 – 107, Avignon,
France.

Robert Stevens, Nicolas Matentzoglu, Uli Sattler, and
Margaret Stevens. 2014. A family history knowl-
edge base in OWL 2. In Informal Proceedings of the
3rd International Workshop on OWL Reasoner Eval-
uation (ORE 2014) co-located with the Vienna Sum-
mer of Logic (VSL 2014), Vienna, Austria, July 13,

1202014., volume 1207 of CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings, pages 71–76. CEUR-WS.org.

Özlem Uzuner and Amber Stubbs. 2015. Practical ap-
plications for natural language processing in clini-
cal research: The 2014 i2b2/uthealth shared tasks.
Journal of biomedical informatics, 58(Suppl):S1.

Brandon M. Welch, Kevin Wiley, Lance Pﬂieger, Ros-
aline Achiangia, Karen Baker, Chanita Hughes-
Halbert, Heath Morrison, Joshua Schiffman, and
Megan Doerr. 2018. Review and comparison of
electronic patient-facing family health history tools.
Journal of Genetic Counseling, 27(2):381–391.

Daniel Zeman, Martin Popel, Milan Straka, Jan Ha-
jic, Joakim Nivre, Filip Ginter, Juhani Luotolahti,
Sampo Pyysalo, Slav Petrov, Martin Potthast, Fran-
cis Tyers, Elena Badmaeva, Memduh Gokirmak,
Anna Nedoluzhko, Silvie Cinkova, Jan Hajic jr.,
Jaroslava Hlavacova, Václava Kettnerová, Zdenka
Uresova, Jenna Kanerva, Stina Ojala, Anna Mis-
silä, Christopher D. Manning, Sebastian Schuster,
Siva Reddy, Dima Taji, Nizar Habash, Herman Le-
ung, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Manuela San-
guinetti, Maria Simi, Hiroshi Kanayama, Valeria de-
Paiva, Kira Droganova, Héctor Martínez Alonso,
Ça˘grı Çöltekin, Umut Sulubacak, Hans Uszkor-
eit, Vivien Macketanz, Aljoscha Burchardt, Kim
Harris, Katrin Marheinecke, Georg Rehm, Tolga
Kayadelen, Mohammed Attia, Ali Elkahky, Zhuoran
Yu, Emily Pitler, Saran Lertpradit, Michael Mandl,
Jesse Kirchner, Hector Fernandez Alcalde, Jana Str-
nadová, Esha Banerjee, Ruli Manurung, Antonio
Stella, Atsuko Shimada, Sookyoung Kwak, Gustavo
Mendonca, Tatiana Lando, Rattima Nitisaroj, and
Josie Li. 2017. CoNLL 2017 Shared Task: Multi-
lingual Parsing from Raw Text to Universal Depen-
dencies. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2017 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Uni-
versal Dependencies, Vancouver, Canada.

A Supplemental material
The annotated data and the code used in this pa-
per is available at: https://github.com/
ltgoslo/NorSynthClinical.

121