Automatic Extraction of Entities and Relation from Legal Documents

Judith Jeyafreeda Andrew1
GREYC , Campus 2 UniCaen,

Bˆatiment F

6 Boulevard Mar´echal Juin , 14000 Caen
judithjeyafreeda@gmail.com

Abstract

In recent years, the journalists and com-
puter sciences speak to each other to
identify useful technologies which would
help them in extracting useful information.
This is called ”computational Journalism”.
In this paper, we present a method that
will enable the journalists to automatically
identiﬁes and annotates entities such as
names of people, organizations, role and
functions of people in legal documents;
the relationship between these entities are
also explored. The system uses a combina-
tion of both statistical and rule based tech-
nique. The statistical method used is Con-
ditional Random Fields and for the rule
based technique, document and language
speciﬁc regular expressions are used.

1

Introduction

Everyday there are a number of legal documents
that are being recorded and made available as text
documents.
In this paper, we present a system
that automatically identiﬁes named entities and
the relationships between various entities within a
dataset of certain type of legal documents which
contains information about people investing in
property. This helps journalists to identify some
useful information - information like the name of
the person investing and company invested in. We
propose a hybrid method to automatically detect
different types of relationship after identifying the
entities within the corpus. We follow a combi-
nation of statistical and rule based techniques to
achieve the goal.

The objective of this project therefore are:

1The work was done while the authors were afﬁliated with

LIMSI, CNRS and Univ. Paris-Sud.

Xavier Tannier1

Sorbonne Universit´e,

Inserm, LIMICS, Paris, France

xavier.tannier@

sorbonne-universite.fr

• To identify and classify the entities within

each of the text documents

• To identify the relationships between the en-

tities

To achieve the objectives, we present a hybrid
system which explores a combination of two tech-
niques for Named Entity recognition (a statistical
approach using Conditional Random Fields (CRF)
and rule based techniques) and produces a graph
with all entities and their relationships, in the per-
spective of a investigative journalism use.

2 Data

The data used in this project is a corpus taken from
the so-called “Luxembourg” corpus. This publicly
available legal register contains information about
people and companies who are investing money
or property in the state of Luxembourg. Most of
the documents are written in French, and we only
worked on this language.

Some of the data set has been annotated manu-
ally with the help of the brat tool (Stenetorp et al.,
2012) for the different classes and the relationship
between the classes by our journalist partners. The
annotations have been done manually for 35 doc-
uments which can be used as a training set to de-
velop a model.

2.1 Entities
The classes used for classiﬁcation of the entities
are as follows:

• PERSONNE represents the name of the person
• NOM represents the ﬁrst name of the person
• ADDRESS represents the address of the orga-

nization

ProceedingsoftheSeventhNamedEntitiesWorkshop,pages1–8Melbourne,Australia,July20,2018.c(cid:13)2018AssociationforComputationalLinguistics1• SOCIETE PRINCIPALE represents the name
of the main company participating in the
transaction

• SOCIETE SECONDAIRE represents the name
of the secondary companies participating in
the transaction

• ROLE represents the role of the identiﬁed per-

son or company in the transaction

• FONCTION is the function or position held by

the identiﬁed person in the transaction

• TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E is the type of the companies

identiﬁed

2.2 Relations
The relationships between the entities are classi-
ﬁed as follows:

• ‘PERSONNE FONCTION” is the relationship
between the class “PERSONNE” and the class
“FONCTION”

• “PERSONNE ROLE” is the relationship be-
tween the class “PERSONNE” and the class
“ROLE”

• “SOCI ´ET ´E ROLE” is the relationship between

the class “SOCI ´ET ´E” and the class “ROLE”

• “SOCI ´ET ´E TYPE” is the relationship be-
tween the class “SOCI ´ET ´E” and the class
“TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E”

2.3 Structure of the corpus
The structure and language of legal documents are
more rigid than free text. When the persons and
companies are identiﬁed, then the other classes ap-
pear in the same sentence and can be identiﬁed by
only a few speciﬁc expressions. Below are few ex-
amples, the translation in English are given in the
”[]”.

• “Ensuite

les

souscripteurs

pr´ed´esign´es,
repr´esent´es par Me Catherine Dessoy,
pr´enomm´ee,
en vertu des procurations
susvant´ees” [”Then the underwriters, rep-
resented by Catherine Dessoy, prenamed,
under
the aforementioned powers of at-
torney”], where “repr´esent´es par” is the
ROLE and “Me Catherine Dessoy” is the
PERSONNE.

• “Par-devant Maˆıtre Blanche Moutrier, notaire
de r´esidence `a Esch-sur-Alzette.”[”Before
Maˆıtre Blanche Moutrier, notary of resi-
dence in Esch-sur-Alzette.”], where “Maˆıtre
Blanche Moutrier” is the PERSONNE and
“notaire” is the FONCTION.

• “CUBE INVEST S.A.-SPF, une soci´et´e de
gestion de patrimoine familial, en abr´eg´e
SPF, sous forme d’une soci´et´e anonyme”
[”CUBE INVEST S.A.-SPF, a family wealth
management company, in abbreviated SPF,
in the form of anonymous company”], where
“CUBE INVEST S.A.-SPF” is the SOCI ´ET ´E
and “soci´et´e de gestion de patrimoine famil-
ial” is the TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E.

Because of this rigid structure of the legal docu-
ments, rule-based techniques will be able to iden-
tify some of the entities. However,
the basic
classes PERSONNE and SOCI ´ET ´E have to be iden-
tiﬁed ﬁrst in order to take advantage of this rigid
structure. Figure 1 shows an example of an anno-
tated document as seen by the BRAT visualization
tool emphasizing on the structure of the legal doc-
uments.

2.4 Training and Test data sets
The data is divided into training and test set. The
training set is a set of corpus consisting of 35 text
ﬁles and test set is a collection of 21 text docu-
ments. The method has been trained and tested on
this small corpus, however it is developed with the
scope of being able to build a graph with all the
documents available in the Luxembourg register.
This mounts up to data between the years 2002 to
2016, containing about 2,041,111 text documents.
For this reason, the training documents have been
taken randomly from the entire collection.

3 Related Work
3.1 Conditional Random Fields
Conditional Random Field (CRF (Lafferty, 2001))
is a sequence modeling technique belonging to the
class of statistical modeling methods. It is often
used in labeling and parsing sequential data. A
CRF has a single exponential model for the joint
probability of the entire sequence of labels given
the observation sequence.
(Sutton and McCal-
lum, 2012) gives a detailed tutorial on Condition
Random ﬁelds. Since the CRF model is condi-
tional, dependencies among the input variables x

2Figure 1: Annotated document presented with the BRAT visualization tool

3do not need to be explicitly represented. This al-
lows CRF to be used widely in Natural Language
Processing.
(Sutton and McCallum, 2012) also
suggests that some of the useful features that could
be used in Natural Language Processing are cap-
italization, word bigrams, neighboring words etc.
In this work, word bigrams and capitalization have
been used extensively.

3.1.1 Conditional Random Fields for Entity

Recognition

There have been quite a lot of work done with re-
spect to entity recognition and classiﬁcation using
CRF.

(N.V et al., 2010) describes the use conditional
Random Fields for Entity Recognition in geolog-
ical text.
(McCallum and Li, 2003) presents a
named entity recognition technique with condi-
tional random ﬁelds, where web enhanced lexi-
cons are used for feature induction.
(Ghamrawi
and McCallum, 2005) present the multi-label clas-
siﬁcation of corpora using classiﬁcation. Multi-
label classiﬁcation is a task of assigning an object
simultaneously to one or multiple classes. (Gham-
rawi and McCallum, 2005) present two graphical
models for multi-label classiﬁcation, namely the
Collective Multi-Label classiﬁer and the Collec-
tive Multi-Label with Features classiﬁer. CRFs
have better performances than many other tech-
niques. (Li et al., 2008) compares SVM with CRF
for named entity recognition with clinical data and
concludes that CRF outperforms SVM.

4 Approach

The approach used is a combination of statistical
approach (CRF) and the rule based technique.

4.1 Process
In order to annotate the corpus with the en-
tities and the relationship,
the work uses two
techniques which are conditional random ﬁelds
and rules based on regular expressions. Condi-
tional Random Fields (CRF) is used to annotate
the document only for the classes ”PERSONNE”,
”SOCI ´ET ´E”, ”NOM”,”ADDRESS”. These classes
are the basic classes and therefore they have to
be identiﬁed ﬁrst. Moreover, we only expect the
other classes to appear in the same sentence as a
”PERSONNE” or a SOCI ´ET ´E or a ”NOM” or a ”AD-
DRESS”. Therefore, identifying these classes will
be the ﬁrst and basic step. For the other classes, a

rule based technique are used. 2 shows the pro-
cess ﬂow used for the annotation of text. The
rules are written in such a way that they identify
the other classes and their relation with the main
classes (”PERSONNE” and ”SOCI ´ET ´E”).

Implementation

5
5.1 Conditional Random Fields (CRF)
In order to annotate the document for the base
classes (“PERSONNE”, “SOCI ´ET ´E”, ”ADDRESS”,
”NOM”), Conditional Random Fields are used.
The system uses the wapiti toolkit (Lavergne et al.,
2010) to train the CRF.

In order to use wapiti, the training set and the
test set are converted into the BIO format. Figure 3
shows how the wapiti tool works in order to train
and test using CRF.

In order to use conditional random ﬁelds, one
has to create a pattern ﬁle with which CRF can be
trained. A pattern ﬁle deﬁnes some features that
are going to be used by the wapiti.

5.2 Regular Expressions for entity

recognition and relationship

In order to identify the other classes (ROLE,
FONCTION, TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E), regular expressions
are used. The rules are written such that once the
entities are identiﬁed the relationship can be estab-
lished with the same rule. This is done by writing
the rules using the relationship itself. For exam-
ple, if there is a “PERSONNE” in a sentence, then
the sentence should have a “ROLE” and a “FONC-
TION” for the identiﬁed person. This suggests that
there exist a relationship between the person and
his/her “ROLE” and “FONCTION”. Therefore, the
entities “ROLE” and “FONCTION” should occur
somewhere close to the entity “PERSONNE”. This
rule-based system is established with the help of
the GATE tool (Cunningham et al., 2011) and the
rules are written as JAPE grammar(Thakker et al.,
2009)

5.2.1 Formation of JAPE rules for the

various classes

Class “FONCTION” The class “FONCTION”
is the job of the person in question. The GATE
gazetteer is used to annotate the function of a per-
son. GATE gazetteer does not have a dictionary
for the function of a person. Therefore, a dictio-
nary is created with all the words that could be the
function of a person. This dictionary has been cre-

4Figure 2: Process Flow for identifying entities and relationships

Figure 3: The process ﬂow as followed by wapiti

5ated with about 500 words and added to the GATE
gazetteer. The rule for the class “FONCTION” was
developed as per the structure of all the docu-
ments in the training set, where it was identiﬁed
that the class “FONCTION” appears with the same
sentence as the class “PERSONNE”. Thus using
the gazetteer and the class “PERSONNE”, the class
“FONCTION” can be annotated and the relation
‘PERSONNE FONCTION” is drawn. For example,
“Par-devant Maˆıtre Blanche Moutrier, notaire de
r´esidence `a Esch-sur-Alzette.”
[”Before Maˆıtre
Blanche Moutrier, notary of residence in Esch-
sur-Alzette.”]. In this sentence, “Maˆıtre Blanche
Moutrier” is the class “PERSONNE” and this is fol-
lowed by the “notaire” which is the “FONCTION”
of “Maˆıtre Blanche Moutrier”.

class “ROLE” The “ROLE” of a “PER-
SONNE” almost always occur in the same sentence
as the class “PERSONNE”. It could occur after or
before “PERSONNE” “ROLE” could also be asso-
ciated with the class “SOCI ´ET ´E” as well. In this
case, the class “ROLE” occurs in the same sen-
tence as the “SOCI ´ET ´E”. This leads to the “PER-
SONNE ROLE” and “SOCI ´ET ´E ROLE” relation.

For

example:

“Pardevant Maˆıtre Henri
Hellinckx, notaire de r´esidence `a Luxembourg.”
[”Late Maˆıtre Henri Hellinckx, notary residing
in Luxembourg.”] In the above sentence, “Parde-
vant” is the “ROLE” played by “Maˆıtre Henri
Hellinckx” and the “FONCTION” is “notaire”.
Therefore the rule is to identify the sequence
“PERSONNE” “FONCTION” and identify the word
before the sequence as “ROLE”.

Another example: “Ont comparu: 1.- La soci`et`e
de droit du Panama DAEDALUS OVERSEAS
INC., ayant son si`ege `a Panama-City” [”Ap-
peared: 1.- The company of law of Panama
DAEDALUS OVERSEAS INC., Having its head-
quarters in Panama-City”], where “Ont comparu”
is the “ROLE” and “DAEDALUS OVERSEAS
INC.” is the “SOCI ´ET ´E” . Here the “ROLE” is
followed by tokens like punctuations and numbers
before the “SOCI ´ET ´E” which also have to be in-
corporated with the rules.

Another example: “Les parts sociales ont `et`e
souscrites par LUXEMBOURG CORPORATION
COMPANY S.A., pr`equaliﬁ`ee, qui est l’associ`ee
unique de la soci´e t´e ” [”The shares have been
subscribed by LUXEMBOURG CORPORATION
COMPANY S.A., prequaliﬁed, which is the sole
partner of the company.”], where “ parts sociales

ont ´et´e souscrites” and “l’associ`ee unique de la
are both “ROLE” of the “SOCI ´ET ´E”
soci´et´e .”
“LUXEMBOURG CORPORATION COMPANY
S.A.” This state of having two roles is handled
with a different rule as well.

Therefore, in order to help handle all these dif-
ferent situations, multiple different rules are used.
A total of 20 different JAPE rules has been written
to annotate all the roles in all the different situa-
tions. This count includes identifying the roles of
the soci´et´e as well.

class

route de Tr`eves,

“TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E” The

class
“TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E” tells about
the type of the
“SOCI ´ET ´E”. Therefore the type has to be occur-
ring in the same sentence as the “SOCI ´ET ´E”. It is
also identiﬁed that all the texts in the training set
had the type of the soci´et´e in the same sentence
as the SOCI ´ET ´E. Also, the type of the soci´et´e
always starts with the word “soci´et´e” followed
by a type. This then leads to the relationship
of “SOCI ´ET ´E TYPE”. Example: “S’est r´eunie
l’Assembl´ee G´en´erale Extraordinaire des associ´e
s de la soci´et´e `a responsabilit´e limit´e e thermo
haus, S.`a r.l., ayant son si`e ge social `a L-6940
Niederanven, 141,
inscrite
au Registre du Commerce et des Soci´e t´es `a
Luxembourg, section B sous le num´ero 74.172,
constitu´ee suivant acte rec¸u par Maˆıtre Alex
Weber, notaire de r´esidence `a Bascharage, en
date du 2 f´evrier 2000, publi´e au M´emorial C de
2000, page 16652.” [”The Extraordinary General
Assembly of the associates of the limited liability
company, S.`a rl, having its if it is located at
L-6940 Niederanven, 141,
route de Trvesves,
entered in the Register of Commerce and Com-
panies in Luxembourg, section B under number
74.172, incorporated according to the deed of the
Court, given to Alex Weber, notary residing at
Bascharage, on February 2, 2000, published in the
M´emorial C of 2000, page 16652.”]. In the above
sentence, “thermo haus, S.`a r.l.” is the SOCI ´ET ´E
and “la soci´et´e `a responsabilit´e limit´ee” is the
TYPE SOCI ´ET ´E.

5.2.2 The GATE pipeline
The JAPE rules are incorporated with the other
inbuilt modules of the GATE tool to create a
pipeline. A GATE pipeline with modules for to-
kenization , POS tagging along with the JAPE
rules is used to annotate the document for the other
classes.

6Mode True Positive False Positive False Negative Precision Recall
Exact
100%
100%
Partial

83.91%
92.08%

318
348

61
30

0
0

Table 1: Results of brat evaluation tool on the training set.

Mode True Positive False Positive False Negative Precision Recall
95.29% 47.93%
Exact
Partial
95.50% 94.09%

81
191

88
12

4
9

Table 2: Results of brat evaluation tool on the test set.

6 Evaluation
For the evaluation of annotations, the brat evalu-
ation tool is used (Stenetorp et al., 2012). The
comparisons can be done in two ways: either by
comparing the ﬁle for exact matches or by partial
matches. By exact matches we mean that the off-
set have to be exactly matched between the two
ﬁles. By partial matches, we mean that even if the
offsets do not match perfectly, partial annotations
are also considered to be correct.
7 Results
The results are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1
corresponds to the results from the training set and
the table 2 corresponds to the results from the test
test. The results depend on both the processes -
the CRF and the rule based technique. The perfor-
mance of the CRF is with an error rate of 3.12%.
The low recall value for the exact matches of
the test set as compared with the training set is due
the tailoring of the rules. While training, the data
set has been referred to at many times to come up
with expressions that will help in retrieving all the
possible instances of every annotations. However,
while the same rules have been run on test data
which has not been seen before hand, it is noted
that there requires many more rules that need to
added to the already existing rules to improve the
recall value.

However it has to be noted that the recall value
is quite high with the partial matches. For ex-
ample: instead of annotating “ici repr´esent´e par”,
it annotates “repr´esent´e par”. This is not totally
wrong. Considering the knowledge base, this an-
notation is still useful. Though it is not the exact
same annotation as in the manual annotation, it is
still considered valid.

Thus considering the results of partial annota-
tions only, this method proves to be quite efﬁcient

in annotating the ﬁles from the “Luxembourg” reg-
ister.

As indicated above, the process has been de-
veloped over a small set of data, but the process
can be run over huge volumes of data. The total
amount of documents tested are 2,041,111. The
number of relations found in these documents are
3,026,560. However, since these data have no
manual annotations, no evaluation was performed
on this set of data.

References
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, Valentin Tablan, Niraj Aswani,
Ian
Roberts, Genevieve Gorrell, Adam Funk, Angus
Roberts, Danica Damljanovic, Thomas Heitz,
Mark A. Greenwood, Horacio Saggion, Johann
Petrak, Yaoyong Li, and Wim Peters. 2011. Text
Processing with GATE (Version 6).

Nadia Ghamrawi and Andrew McCallum. 2005. Col-
lective multi-label classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of
the 14th ACM International Conference on Informa-
tion and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’05, pages
195–200, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

John Lafferty. 2001. Conditional random ﬁelds: Prob-
abilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. pages 282–289. Morgan Kaufmann.

Thomas Lavergne, Olivier Capp´e, and Franc¸ois Yvon.
In Pro-
2010. Practical Very Large Scale CRFs.
ceedings the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 504–
513, Uppsala, Sweden. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dingcheng Li, Karin Kipper-Schuler, and Guergana
Savova. 2008. Conditional random ﬁelds and sup-
port vector machines for disorder named entity
recognition in clinical texts. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical Natu-
ral Language Processing, BioNLP ’08, pages 94–
95, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.

7Andrew McCallum and Wei Li. 2003. Early results for
named entity recognition with conditional random
ﬁelds, feature induction and web-enhanced lexicons.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natu-
ral Language Learning, CoNLL 2003, Held in coop-
eration with HLT-NAACL 2003, Edmonton, Canada,
May 31 - June 1, 2003, pages 188–191.

Sobhana N.V, Pabitra Mitra, and S.K. Ghosh. 2010.
Article: Conditional random ﬁeld based named en-
International
tity recognition in geological text.
Journal of Computer Applications, 1(3):119–125.
Published By Foundation of Computer Science.

Pontus Stenetorp, Sampo Pyysalo, Goran Topi´c,
Tomoko Ohta, Sophia Ananiadou, and Jun’ichi Tsu-
jii. 2012. BRAT: A Web-based Tool for NLP-
In Proceedings of the
assisted Text Annotation.
Demonstrations at the 13th Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL’12), pages 102–107, Avignon,
France. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Charles Sutton and Andrew McCallum. 2012. An
introduction to conditional random ﬁelds. Found.
Trends Mach. Learn., 4(4):267–373.

Dhaval Thakker, Taha Osman, and Phil Lakin. 2009.

GATE JAPE grammar tutorial.

8